Bike Route Bike routes are shared streets that utilize signage and pavement markings (i.e. sharrows) to indicate that bicyclists may be present. Bike routes are typically designated along local streets with low volumes of vehicle traffic. Bike Boulevards City Council designated Silver Avenue as a Bicycle Boulevard in 2009. Bike boulevards are low-stress corridors with slow driver speeds and low vehicle volumes. They feature traffic calming elements and enhanced crossing treatments to reduce through vehicle traffic and manage driver speeds. Bike Lanes Through striping, bike lanes delineate a separate, dedicated space for people biking. Standard bike lanes are typically located at the road edge and do not provide additional vertical or horizontal separation from vehicular travel lanes. Buffered Bike Lanes Buffered bike lanes are bikeways with striped, horizontal space between the bike lane and the adjacent vehicle travel lane, which provides additional separation between bicyclists and moving vehicle traffic. Separated (Protected) Bike Lanes Separated bike lanes, also known as protected bike lanes, are a form of buffered bike lane that features some form of vertical separation from motor vehicles and are located at street level. Paved Multi-Use Trails Paved multi-use trails are off-street facilities in their own right-of-way that are shared with people walking. Sidepaths Paved multi-use sidepaths are two-way, off-street facilities that are shared among people biking and walking. Sidepaths are located within the public street right-of-way on the outside of the curb. Because sidepaths are located at curb level, they provide vertical separation between people biking and motor vehicle traffic. Bike Loop Detectors Loop detectors are coils of wire set into the pavement which, after they are electromagnetically triggered, alert traffic lights to change in the direction of travel, similar to a vehicle. They also extend the allotted crossing time. Green “Paint” Green thermoplastic sometimes called green “paint” provides increased visibility to people cycling and people driving while also providing a slip-resistant surface to allow cyclists better traction in inclement weather. Green thermoplastic can help delineate potential conflict zones between drivers and people cycling at locations such as driveways or intersections. Bike Boxes A bike box is a designated area at the head of a traffic lane at a signalized intersection that provides bicyclists with a visible way to get ahead of queuing traffic during the red signal phase. Two-Stage Bike Box A two-stage bike box has been added to the intersection of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Ave and Broadway Blvd. to aid bicyclists in making a left hand turn. What will you see? Bicyclists headed westbound on Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Ave will notice a green box as they cross Broadway blvd. How Bicyclists Should Use a Two-Stage Bike Box When the traffic signal is green, proceed from the westbound Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Ave. bike lane through the intersection to the green bike box. Face your bike southbound and wait for the signal indication in front of you to turn green. Ride southbound across the intersection in the traffic lane, not the crosswalk. Drivers should stop at the stop bar prior to the green box. Shared Lane Markings (SLMs) or "Sharrows" Road markings are used to indicate a shared lane environment for people cycling and people driving. Among other benefits shared lane markings reinforce the legitimacy of bicycle traffic on the street, recommend proper bicyclist positioning, and may be configured to offer directional and wayfinding guidance. Pedestrian Hybrid Beacon (PHB) or High-Intensity Activated Crosswalk (HAWK) Signal The PHB or HAWK signal differs from other pedestrian signals in that it requires vehicles to stop and acts as a stop light when lit, creating a safer environment than a standard crosswalk. The City uses the Bicycle and Trail Crossings Guide to determine when this treatment is appropriate. The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) identified PHBs as a proven safety countermeasure meaning this is an effective strategy to improve safety and reduce traffic fatalities and serious injuries. For detailed information on the HAWK signal and a demonstration video, click here. HAWK signals can be found at many locations around Albuquerque including but not limited to throughout the Central Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART) corridor and Lomas Blvd. and Alvarado Dr. as part of the Fair Heights Bike Boulevard. Rectangular Rapid Flashing Beacon (RRFB) RRFBs enhance the visibility of people crossing the street at marked crosswalks. They consist of two, rectangular-shaped yellow indications, each with a light-emitting LED-array-based light source. RRFBs flash with an alternating high frequency when activated to enhance the conspicuity of pedestrians at the crossing to drivers. The City uses the Bicycle and Trail Crossings Guide to determine when this treatment is appropriate. The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) identified RRFBs as a proven safety countermeasure meaning this is an effective strategy to improve safety and reduce traffic fatalities and serious injuries. RRFBs can be found at many locations around Albuquerque including Juan Tabo and Camero, Indian School and Britt, and Bluewater and Luminoso. Posted Signs you will see around Albuquerque Indicate to bicyclists that they are on a designated bikeway. Make motorists aware of the bicycle route. Silver Avenue was designated a Bicycle Boulevard by the City Council in 2009. Bicycle Boulevards are generally characterized by low speed limits, free flow travel for bikes through intersections, and signs or markings that alert motorists that bicyclists are the priority user on what is intended to be a “bike expressway.” New Mexico State Statutes Flashing yellow lights are used to bring caution to drivers. See below NM State Statutes. (Links will not open with Internet Explorer) Flashing Signals FLASHING SIGNALS 66-7-107 Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; or flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. Crossing at Other Than Crosswalks CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS 66-7-335 Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. Pedestrians' Right of Way in Crosswalks PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALKS 66-7-334 When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is in the crosswalk. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle that is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. Whenever a vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of another vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.