Locations Eastside Shelter: 8920 Lomas NE, Albuquerque, NM 87112 Westside Shelter: 11800 Sunset Gardens SW, Albuquerque, NM 87121 Additional AWD Services Contact Telephone: 505-768-1975 Albuquerque Shelters Map Hours Both the Eastside & Westside shelters are open 7 days per week. Admissions: 7:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Adoptions: 10:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Reclaims: 7:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Other Services (e.g., microchipping, permit processing, and ownership changes): 9:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Holiday Hours Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day: Closed Presidents Day: Closed Memorial Day: Closed Juneteenth: Open Independence Day - July Fourth: Open Labor Day: Closed Indigenous Peoples Day: Closed Veterans Day: Open Thanksgiving: Closed Day After Thanksgiving: Closed Christmas Eve: Open Christmas Day: Closed New Year's Eve: Open New Year's Day: Closed After-Hours Emergency Care Locations Additional AWD Services About Animal Reclaiming Residents must bring proof of ownership to reclaim. A valid Photo ID is required with proof of address if other than what is on the ID. If your dog is spayed/neutered and has never been impounded fees will be waived. Otherwise fees typically apply and must be paid at the time of reclaim. Credit cards will not be accepted after regular shelter business hours. All animals must be sterilized before release; if your pet is not already sterilized, it will stay at the shelter and have surgery on the next available date. Some situations require special approval and must occur during regular shelter business hours. Only animals that already have a valid intact permit or animals from counties other than Bernalillo, Valencia, Torrance, Santa Fe, Sandoval, or Cibola, will be released unsterilized. Residents must live in Albuquerque to bring animals. Animal Reclaim The fees associated with reclaiming your pet can vary significantly and depend on whether or not your pet has been previously impounded, spayed/neutered, licensed or vaccinated and the number of days your animal has spent in our shelter. Other fees may apply when reclaiming your animal. Please be sure to: Have proof of animal ownership (vaccination or photo) Have proof of vaccination (if applicable) Have a valid driver's license or photo ID with your date of birth, and proof of your current address. Must be over 18 years of age. Animal Services accepts payment by cash, check, VISA, MasterCard, and American Express. Found a pet? Lost a pet? We can help. One of the quickest ways to reunite the pet with its owner is to deliver it to Eastside or Westside shelter only. Stray animals will be held there until available for adoption. Find more information about  finding your lost pets and what to do with found pets. Returning a Pet If you change your mind shortly after adopting an animal, returning a pet that was adopted from the Animal Welfare Department must be done by the adopting party. Animal Admissions Seven days a week 7:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. If you are considering surrendering a pet, please contact an Animal Welfare surrender counselor by calling 311 or 505-768-2000. Learn More: Animal Surrender Counselors Animal Welfare surrender counselors work with pet owners to find an acceptable way to prevent the surrender. Counselor services include: Advice on behavior issues Free low-income and moderate-income spay or neuter services Advice on other placement options for best interests of the animal To voluntarily be placed on a waiting list, call 311 or 505-768-2000 and provide your name and telephone number to the operator. You will be contacted within one to three days. If you must surrender a dog or cat immediately, please bring the pet to the East Side Shelter . Eastside Shelter: 8920 Lomas NE, Albuquerque, NM 87112 After-Hours Emergency Care Locations These facilities will not be able to accommodate Healthy Strays. Please be aware that hours and services may differ depending on location. Please call before visiting. Route 66 Veterinary Emergency & Critical Care Center Address: 3601 Central Ave NE, Albuquerque NM,87108 Telephone: 505-266-7866 Website: https://www.rt66vet.com/ VCA Wyoming Address: 2740 Wyoming Blvd., N.E., Suite 1, Albuquerque, NM 87111 Telephone: 505-298-7444 Website: https://vcahospitals.com/wyoming Roadrunner Veterinary Address: Camino Karsten, Algodones, NM 87001 Telephone: 505-384-6420 Non-Emergency Issues All non-injured found pets should be taken to the Eastside shelter during normal intake hours ( 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.) Do not take non-emergencies to emergency care.