PDF PAGE 1
iii





INDICATORS PROGRESS COMMISSION

July  2004

Dear Albuquerque Citizen:

The Vision Statement for our city, adopted by the Mayor and Council in 2002, states:

Albuquerque is a thriving high desert community of distinctive cultures
coming together to create a sustainable future.

It is in the spirit of this vision that the Indicators Progress Commission (IPC) is pleased to
present Albuquerque Progress Report (APR) 2004. The APR describes the status of
indicators which measure the progress that our community is making toward realizing the City
of Albuquerque’s Vision and its Five-year Goals. The IPC, a citizen body appointed by the
Mayor with advice and consent of the City Council, has the statutory responsibility for
developing these indicators.

As a result of a community Goals Forums held in the summer of 2002, goals and resulting
desired community conditions were developed by several hundred citizens.  These goals and
desired conditions were formally adopted by the City Council and approved by the Mayor,
pursuant to the City Charter and Budget Ordinance.   The desired community conditions flesh
out in more detail what the realization of each one of the Five-year Goals would mean. The
IPC identified one or more measures of these conditions —Goal Progress Indicators. The
indicators are the heart of this volume. They measure trends, and where no trend data is
available, establish baselines for future comparison. Trends will continue to be tracked, as
appropriate, and reported in future updates of the Progress Report.

The following criteria were adopted for evaluating the indicators.

C
We favored indicators that directly measured Desired Community Conditions. In some
cases, where direct measures were simply not available, we used appropriate surrogate
measures.

C
The data had to be available to us.  We looked for assurance that it would be updated on a
fairly regular basis to facilitate long-term trend analyses. In cases in which historical data
were not obtainable, we sought assurance that future updates of current data would occur,
so the indicator presented in this report serves to establish a baseline.

An intent of the Budget Ordinance is to provide guidance to policy makers in the years ahead
through the Albuquerque Progress Report and to assist City government in its effort to be
more responsive to the needs of the community by focusing on results.  The Goals provide
an important framework for the City budget.  City Program Strategies are explicitly tied to the
very Desired Community Conditions measured in this report.

The IPC is committed to raising the level of public policy dialogue and helping our community
make progress towards achieving its goals.  It is our hope that the APR 2004 will provide the

PDF PAGE 2
iv
data that will help answer some of the questions asked by City policy makers, managers, and
employees in their quest for greater program effectiveness and efficiency:
•
Why does the City provide the services that it does?
•
What impacts are our services having on community conditions?
•
If the conditions aren’t improving, what else can we do?  Can we afford it?
•
How can we be even more effective?

As the reader considers the eight Goals and the wide range of Desired Community
Conditions addressed in this report, one conclusion should be inescapable.  Government
cannot, nor should, do it alone. Positive results require the cooperative efforts of individuals,
businesses, and community agencies and organizations. This report helps us measure the
results of our combined efforts to meet these challenges.  We hope all citizens will review this
report and identify goals and measures of personal interest.  In understanding the information
presented in the APR, please accept this direction.  All measures need context.  Do not
confuse the indicator with the Desired Condition itself.  For example, we utilized second
grade reading levels not as an indicator of APS performance but as one indicator of several
for LITERACY in Albuquerque.  The Desired Condition is the focus.  The indicator helps us
understand if we are making progress toward it.

We could not have produced this volume without the assistance of many talented individuals,
both inside and outside of City government, who so generously donated their time, expertise,
and most importantly, data to this enterprise. To them we express our heartfelt gratitude.

Finally, we wish to thank the elected leaders of the City of Albuquerque — the Mayor and the
nine members of the City Council. This report would not have been possible without their
ongoing support of this process through their ideas, their openness, and their willingness to
grant this Commission access to the many layers of expertise within City government.


Sincerely,

Stephen S. Baca, Chairman

Susan Gorman, Vice Chairperson


Richard R. Fairbanks


Paul Guerin


Donald Hurst




Nancy Kilpatrick

Erica Landry


John “Abe” Lillard


Steve Seligman
