zonar.city
info@gridics.com
TYPE
TOD Study
YEAR
2017
PROPERTIES
10,000+
AREA SIZE
5/8 mile around 
each transit 
station
	
ABOUT THE PROJECT
The City of Albuquerque needed to analyze proposed zoning 
code changes that would increase density around stations 
along a new BRT transit line. These changes are expected to 
be enacted as a new zoning regulation.
USE OF ZONAR
The City of Albuquerque engaged Zonar, Urban 3, Crab 
Tree Group, DPZ, Placemakers, and CNT to provide 
recommendations and understand the development potential 
along the new transit line. Zonar was used to analyze empty 
lots and understand the potential of proposed zoning changes. 
Data created by Zonar was then used for tax and financial 
forecasting, to analyze potential infrastructure demand, and 
to model new incentives to encourage development. Zonar 
identified unwanted outcomes with the new code in study, 
including non-compliance of empty parcels. Alternative 
solutions were tested with Zonar in real-time at public 
workshops.
RESULTS
Results are currently being used to create new legislation for 
the proposed TOD. 
CASE STUDY
TOD: Analyzing Proposed 
Zoning Changes Bordering a 
New Transit Line
ALBUQUERQUE, NEW MEXICO
As consultants to both municipalities and developers 
alike, we have seen just how useful Zonar is on both 
sides of the zoning equation. I wouldn’t want to analyze the 
implications of zoning change without it.
Matt Lambert 
DPZ Partner


zonar.city
info@gridics.com
CASE STUDY
The Underline: Incentives for 
pedestrian friendly frontages.
TYPE
Thoroughfare 
Study
YEAR
2016
PROPERTIES
200+
AREA SIZE
5 Miles
	
Zonar helped us facilitate the conversation between 
property owners and city officials regarding the 
potential changes of over 200 properties fronting the 
proposed Underline project.
Meg Daly 
Founder
MIAMI, FLORIDA
ABOUT THE PROJECT
The Underline is a 5+ mile proposed linear park underneath 
the Miami Metrorail elevated tracks with multiple properties 
abutting the project.  Current zoning regulations treat 
these frontages as alleys/backside, with little pedestrian 
interaction. The goal of the Underline is to activate this 
dormant urban space and encourage pedestrian friendly 
development and active uses along the dense corridor.
USE OF ZONAR
The Underline and the City of Miami engaged Zonar to 
quickly understand the development impact of proposed 
setback changes along properties fronting the Metrorail 
path.  Small changes were tested and proposed to 
encourage development of active uses along the park, to 
mitigate loss of development potential due to new setbacks, 
and provide incentives to property owners that ensure their 
support of the project.
RESULTS
The Underline is partially funded and begun construction.  
Proposed zoning changes are currently moving through the 
local legislature.


ABOUT THE PROJECT
A study was completed with the University of Miami to 
understand how much residential space was necessary 
to move the families affected by possible sea level rise 
in the next 50 years.  Different teams were tasked with 
residential displacement scenarios in different South Florida 
neighborhoods which included the City  of Miami Beach, City 
of Miami, City of North Miami, the Florida Keys, and Miami-
Dade County.
USE OF ZONAR
Zonar was used to quickly understand how many buildings 
and how many floors would be required to replace lost 
surface area due to sea level rise.  Various scenarios were 
run based on different sea level rise projections. Areas 
around transit stations were selected for density increases.
RESULTS
In the City of Miami, it was hoped that the needed density 
could be achieved to have buildings no more than 10 
stories. However, Zonar showed that 20 story buildings 
would be needed, with 30 and 40 story buildings added 
to create a better skyline.  A Transfer Development Rights 
(TDR) program was also proposed to facilitate the gradual 
densification of single family areas in higher elevations at 
lower risk of rising sea levels.
zonar.city
info@gridics.com
CASE STUDY
Rising Seas: Understanding the 
impact of sea level rise.
TYPE
Density Study
YEAR
2017
PROPERTIES
5,000+
AREA SIZE
2.5 square miles
	
SOUTH FLORIDA


zonar.city
info@gridics.com
CASE STUDY
Broker Insight: Better insight for 
commercial real estate brokers 
and their clients.
TYPE
Zonar 
Subscription
CLIENT
Keller Williams 
Realty 
INDUSTRY
Commercial 
Real Estate
	
MIAMI, FLORIDA
Zonar is an indispensable marketing and sales 
tool  that provides our clients on both sides of a 
commercial transaction added peace of mind, helping lead 
to quicker closings and higher closing prices for sellers.
Louis Erice 
Commercial Real Estate
ABOUT
Keller Williams is one of the largest real estate brokerages 
in South Florida and the United States.  They handle both 
residential and commercial real estate, representing buyers 
and sellers.
USE OF ZONAR
Zonar is used by Keller Williams in South Florida as an added 
value and service to their commercial real estate clients.   
Zonar makes it fast and easy for KW Agents to determine the 
value of a parcel or assemblage based on it’s development 
potential. 
The application is an indispensable tool that helps listing 
agents get a competitive edge with new clients looking to sell 
their property.  Zonar has been used to help clients correctly 
price their property and identify hidden value, in some cases 
leading to higher closing prices for sellers. 
Overall, Zonar helps Keller Williams and their agents make 
more informed decisions,  serves as a visualization tool for 
potential buyers, and saves time when performing research.


ABOUT
Akerman LLP is a leading transactions and trial law firm 
known for its core strengths in middle market M&A, within the 
financial services and real estate industries.  With a nationally 
recognized land use practice, including experience in complex 
large-scale development and urban infill projects, Akerman 
represents real estate clients in land use and development 
matters throughout the United States.
USE OF ZONAR
Zonar serves as an additional layer of due diligence for 
Akerman LLP and their clients. Whether representing clients 
who are performing their due diligence prior to purchasing 
or redeveloping land, or checking documentation prior to 
submitting plans to the local planning department, Zonar 
scenarios provides additional insight and peace of mind.
The land-use attorneys at Akerman LLP use Zonar to 
understand whether the actual development intensity 
permitted under law is achievable.  Attorneys are able to 
quickly understand the practical constraints of a building and 
visualize the density capacity for clients. Zonar also helps 
Ackerman LLP and their clients run scenarios to understand 
the implications of potential land upzoning or rezoning.
zonar.city
info@gridics.com
CASE STUDY
Due Diligence: Understanding 
if the development intensity 
permitted under law is achievable.
TYPE
Zonar 
Subscription
CLIENT
Akerman, LLP
INDUSTRY
Legal
	
MIAMI, FLORIDA
Zonar allows us to quickly take real world practical 
constraints, model a building in 3D, and see if the 
permitted development intensity is actually achievable.
Maeve Desmond 
Urban Planner
