

















 
 
City of Albuquerque 
 
Request for Proposals 
 
 
Solicitation Number:  P2017000001 
 
ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning 
August 05, 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deadline for Receipt of Proposals: September 06, 2016:  4:00 p.m. (Mountain Time) 
The City eProcurement System will not allow Proposals to be submitted after this date and time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
2
City of Albuquerque 
Department of Finance and Administrative Services 
Purchasing Division 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
Part 
1 
Instructions to Offerors 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
Part 
2 
Proposal Format 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
         Part  3       Scope of Services                                                                 15 
  
         Part  4       Evaluation of Proposals                                                    17 
  
         Part  5       Notice of No Preference           
        
                  18 
                                                                               
         Part  6       Draft Agreement                                                                  19 
  
  
 
Appendix A Cost Proposal Form  
 
 
 
A-1  
  
 
Appendix B Federal Forms  
 
 
 
 
B-1 thru B-10 
 
 
Appendix C Study by Center for Neighborhood Technology 
C-1 thru C-41 
  
 
Appendix D City’s TOD Planning Grant Application 
 
D-1 thru  D-23  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
3
INTRODUCTION 
 
The City of Albuquerque (“City”) seeks a consulting firm or team (“Offeror”) with expertise in 
transit-oriented development (“TOD”) planning and public consensus building, as well as unified 
development and form based codes, and comprehensive plans. The objective is to develop station 
area and corridor-wide strategies that will most effectively guide progress toward achieving the 
$2 billion corridor real estate re/investment potential and $1 billion in cost of living savings to 
households from the resulting locational efficiencies and utilization of an improved transit 
system identified in a study by the Center for Neighborhood Technology attached as Appendix 
C. 
Planning work will address the entire transit project corridor, i.e., an approximately 17-mile 
stretch of Central Avenue (formerly Route 66). It includes a study area of 5/8 of a mile buffers 
around planned Albuquerque Rapid Transit (“ART”) stops along the corridor, from Tramway 
Boulevard on the east to Unser on the west. It also includes the ART north-south service 
between Central Avenue and Uptown via Louisiana Boulevard, terminating at the Uptown 
Transit Center, which itself is the subject of an associated development project between ABQ 
Ride (the City’s Transit Department) and the Federal Transit Administration (“FTA”). Past 
FTA grant funds have been allocated toward conversion of the current surface transit 
operations into one incorporated in a multi-story mixed use development project. In addition to 
generating strategies and measures of implementation, the effort will also inform the City’s 
update of its Comprehensive Plan and creation of its Integrated Development Ordinance 
(zoning code), a process referred to as ABC->Z. 
 
The work requested by this RFP is to be funded by a federal TOD Planning Grant for which the 
City’s grant application can be found here as Appendix D.  
 
GOALS 
 
Accelerate the achievement of $2 billion of real estate re/investment in the Central Avenue 
Corridor and $1 billion of cost of living reductions to City residents who are able to capitalize on 
efficiencies such as proximity to an improved transit system. 
 
BUDGET 
 
The City has budgeted up to $450,000 to spend on this planning effort. Given that level of 
resources, the successful Offeror will propose an approach that prioritizes station area 
engagement in areas most able to contribute to the target re/investment goal and time frame 
given market and other conditions. Broader strategies for other portions of the corridor will 
also be included.  
 
TEAMS 
 
Offerors are welcome to respond individually or in teams.   
 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
4
PART 1 
INSTRUCTIONS TO OFFERORS 
 
 
1.1 
RFP Number and Title: 
P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
1.2 
Proposal Due Date:   September 06, 2016 - NLT 4:00 PM (Local Time)  
The time and date Proposals are due shall be strictly observed. 
 
 
1.3 
Purchasing Division:  This Request for Proposals (“RFP”) is issued on behalf of the City of 
Albuquerque by its Purchasing Division, which is the sole point of contact during the entire 
procurement process. 
 
1.4  
Authority:  Chapter 5, Article 5 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Albuquerque, 
1994, (“Public Purchases Ordinance”).  The City Council, pursuant to Article 1 of the Charter of the 
City of Albuquerque and Article X, Section 6 of the Constitution of New Mexico, has enacted this 
Public Purchases Ordinance as authorized by such provisions and for the purpose of providing 
maximum local self-government.  To that end, it is intended that this Public Purchases Ordinance 
shall govern all purchasing transactions of the City and shall serve to exempt the City from all 
provisions of the New Mexico Procurement Code, as provided in Section 13-1-98K, NMSA 1978. 
 
1.5 
Acceptance of Proposal: Acceptance of Proposal is contingent upon Offeror's certification 
and agreement by submittal of its Proposal, to comply and act in accordance with all provisions of 
the following: 
 
1.5.1 City Public Purchases Ordinance  
 
1.5.2 City Purchasing Rules and Regulations:  These Rules and Regulations 
(“Regulations”) are written to clarify and implement the provisions of the Public Purchases 
Ordinance.  These Regulations establish policies, procedures, and guidelines relating to the 
procurement, management, control, and disposal of goods, services, and construction, as 
applicable, under the authority of the Ordinance. 
 
1.5.3 Civil Rights Compliance:  Acceptance of Proposal is contingent upon the Offeror's 
certification and agreement by submittal of its Proposal, to comply and act in accordance 
with  all provisions of the Albuquerque Human Rights Ordinance, the New Mexico Human 
Rights Act, Title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, and all federal 
statutes and executive orders, New Mexico statutes and City of Albuquerque ordinances and 
resolutions relating to the enforcement of civil rights and affirmative action.  Questions 
regarding civil rights or affirmative action compliance requirements should be directed to the 
City of Albuquerque Human Rights Office. 
 
1.5.4 Americans with Disabilities Act Compliance:  The Offeror certifies and agrees, by 
submittal of its Proposal, to comply and act in accordance with all applicable provisions of 
the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 and federal regulations promulgated thereunder. 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
5
1.5.5 Insurance and Bonding Compliance:  Acceptance of Proposal is contingent upon 
Offeror's ability to comply with the insurance requirements as stated herein.  Please include  
a certificate or statement of compliance in your Proposal and bonds as required. 
 
1.5.6 Ethics: 
 
1.5.6.1 Fair Dealing.  The Offeror warrants that its Proposal is submitted and 
entered into without collusion on the part of the Offeror with any person or firm, 
without fraud and in good faith.  Offeror also warrants that no gratuities, in the form 
of entertainment, gifts or otherwise, were, or will be offered or given by the Offeror, 
or any agent or representative of the Offeror to any officer or employee of the City 
with a view toward securing a recommendation of award or subsequent contract or 
for securing more favorable treatment with respect to making a recommendation of 
award. 
 
1.5.6.2 Conflict of Interest.  The Offeror warrants that it presently has no interest 
and shall not acquire any interest, direct or indirect, which would conflict in any 
manner or degree with the performance of services required under the contract 
resulting from this RFP.  The Offeror also warrants that, to the best of its knowledge, 
no officer, agent or employee of the City who shall participate in any decision 
relating to this RFP and the resulting contract, currently has, or will have in the 
future, a personal or pecuniary interest in the Offeror’s business. 
 
 
1.5.7 Participation/Offeror Preparation:  The Offeror may not use the consultation or 
assistance of any person, firm company who has participated in whole or in part in the 
writing of these specifications or the Scope of Services, for the preparation of its Proposal or 
in the management of its business if awarded the contract resulting from this RFP. 
 
1.5.8 Debarment or Ineligibility Compliance:  By submitting its Proposal in response to 
this RFP, the Offeror certifies that (i) it has not been debarred or otherwise found ineligible 
to receive funds by any agency of the federal government, the State of New Mexico, any 
local public body of the State, or any state of the United States; and (ii) should any notice of 
debarment, suspension, ineligibility or exclusion be received by the Offeror, the Offeror will 
notify the City immediately. 
 
Any Proposal received from an Offeror that is, at the time of submitting its Proposal or prior 
to receipt of award of a contract, debarred by or otherwise ineligible to receive funds from 
any agency of the federal government, the State of New Mexico, any local public body of the 
State, or any state of the United States, shall be rejected. 
 
Upon receipt of notice of debarment of an Offeror awarded a contract as a result of this RFP 
(“Contractor”), or other ineligibility of the Contractor to receive funds from any agency of 
the federal government, the State of New Mexico, any local public body of the State, or any 
state of the United States, the City shall have the right to cancel the contract with the 
Contractor resulting from this RFP for cause in accordance with the terms of said contract. 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
6
1.5.9 Goods Produced Under Decent Working Conditions:  It is the policy of the City 
not to purchase, lease, or rent goods for use or for resale at City owned enterprises that were 
produced under sweatshop conditions.  The Offeror certifies, by submittal of its Proposal in 
response to this solicitation, that the goods offered to the City were produced under decent 
working conditions.  The City defines “under decent working conditions” as production in a 
factory in which child labor and forced labor are not employed; in which adequate wages and 
benefits are paid to workers; in which workers are not required to work more than 48 hours 
per week (or less if a shorter workweek applies); in which employees are free from physical, 
sexual or verbal harassment; and in which employees can speak freely about working 
conditions and can participate in and form unions. [Council Bill No. M-8, Enactment No. 9-
1998] 
 
1.5.10 Graffiti Free:   When required, the Contractor will be required to furnish equipment, 
facilities, or other items required to complete these services, that are graffiti-free.  Failure of 
Contractor to comply with this requirement may result in cancellation of the contract 
resulting from this RFP. 
 
1.6 
City Contact:  The sole point of contact for this RFP is the City of Albuquerque Purchasing 
Division.  Questions regarding this RFP should be directed to the following Purchasing 
representative for this solicitation through the online eProcurement system unless otherwise 
specified in the solicitation: 
 
• Rebbekka Tynan, Senior Buyer, Department of Finance and Administrative Services, 
Purchasing Division 
• Phone:  (505) 768-4945 or E-Mail: rtynan@cabq.gov 
• Post Office Box 1293, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103 
 
1.7 
Contract Management:  The contract resulting from this RFP will be managed by the 
Economic Development Department, Economic Development Division.   
 
1.8 
Clarification:  Any explanation desired by an Offeror regarding the meaning or 
interpretation of this RFP must be requested in writing not less than ten (10) working days prior to 
the deadline for the receipt of Proposals to allow sufficient time for a reply to reach all Offerors 
before the submission of their Proposals. No extension of time will be granted based on submission 
of inquiries subsequent to the required date nor will such inquiries be answered.  All inquiries must 
be directed to the Purchasing Division as stated herein.  Oral explanations or instructions given 
before the award of the contract or at any time will not be binding.  All answers will be posted to the 
online eProcurement System and will constitute Addenda to this RFP.   
 
1.9         Submission of Proposals.  The Offeror’s sealed Proposal must be submitted both in hard 
copy (see Sections 1.9.5 through 1.9.7) as well as electronically through the eProcurement 
system (see Section 1.9.1) in the format outlined in Part 2 of this RFP and mailed or delivered 
pursuant to the following requirements: 
 
            1.9.1     Electronic Copy.  Submit your complete Proposal including all forms, attachments, 
exhibits, Technical Proposal, Cost Proposal, etc. using the eProcurement System at 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
7
http://www.cabq.gov/dfa/purchasing/solicitations/solicitations.  If you do not have a username and 
password, please register as this is the only method to submit electronically on Sicomm.net.  For 
assistance, please contact the Sicomm.net technical support at (800) 614-0563 or (505) 341-9201. 
 
1.9.2    Hard Copy.   In addition to the electronic submittal, the Offeror must also submit 
one (1) original and (ten) copies of its Technical Proposal.  The original Proposal shall be clearly 
marked as “Original” on the cover of the Proposal.  In addition, in a separate envelope, clearly 
marked as “Cost Proposal,” submit one (1) original and (10) copies of your Cost Proposal for this 
RFP.  
 
1.9.3       Soft Copy.  In addition to the electronic copy, include with your original hard copy 
Proposal submission, on a CD, DVD, or other  media compatible with the City’s system, an 
electronic file of your Technical and Cost Proposals as well as all forms, attachments, exhibits, etc. 
 
1.9.4       Proposal Package Preparation.  Proposals and modifications thereof shall be 
enclosed in sealed envelopes and have the following identifying information on the outside: 
 
 Name and Address of Offeror 
 Closing Date and Time of RFP 
 RFP Number 
 RFP Title 
 
 
1.9.5       Ship, Deliver, or Hand-Carry Sealed Proposals to:  Office of the City Clerk, 600 
Second St. NW, Plaza Del Sol, 7th Floor Room 720, Albuquerque, New Mexico  87102.  Mark all 
packages as stated above.  Use this address for packages sent via non United States Postal Service 
carriers. 
 
1.9.6       Mail Sealed Proposals to:  Office of the City Clerk, Post Office Box 1293, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103.  (Certified Mail is recommended).  The City shall not be 
responsible for the failure of mailed Proposals to actually be received by the Office of the City Clerk 
by 4:00 PM (Mountain Time) of the day of closing.   
 
ALL SEALED PROPOSALS MUST BE RECEIVED BY THE OFFICE OF THE CITY 
CLERK AS SPECIFIED HEREIN. 
 
1.9.7     No other methods of Proposal delivery.  Neither telephone, facsimile, nor 
telegraphic Proposals shall be accepted. 
 
1.9.8       Modification.  Proposals may be modified or withdrawn only by written notice, 
provided such notice is received prior to the Proposal Due Date. 
 
            1.9.9     Receipt of Proposals.  The only acceptable evidence to establish the time of receipt 
of Proposals at the City Clerk's Office is the time-date stamp of that Office on the Proposal wrapper 
or other documentary evidence of receipt maintained by that Office.  Since both electronic and hard 
copy submission is required, the City will treat the time-stamp of the later of the two receipts as the 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
8
official documentary evidence of receipt. 
 
            1.9.10 Acknowledgment of Addenda to the Request for Proposals:  Receipt of Addenda 
to this RFP by an Offeror must be acknowledged a) by signing and returning the Addenda, or b) by 
letter.  Such acknowledgment may be submitted with the Proposal.  Such acknowledgment must be 
received prior to the hour and date specified for receipt of Proposals. 
 
1.10 
Modifications to Scope of Services:  In the event that sufficient funds do not become 
available to complete each task in the Scope of Services, the Scope of Services may be amended, 
based upon the cost breakdown required in the Cost Proposal. 
 
1.11 
Draft Agreement:  A copy of the Draft Agreement to be entered into is included in the RFP. 
 Please state that you accept the terms and conditions of the Draft Agreement, or note exceptions.  
The Draft Agreement may differ from the final Agreement. 
 
1.12 
Contract Term:  The contract resulting from this solicitation is anticipated to have a term of 
one (1) year.  
  
1.13 
Evaluation Period:  The City reserves the right to analyze, examine and interpret any 
Proposal for a period of ninety (90) days after the hour and date specified for the receipt of 
Proposals. 
 
1.14 
Evaluation Assistance:  The City of Albuquerque, in evaluating Proposals, reserves the right 
to use any assistance deemed advisable, including City contractors and consultants. 
 
1.15 
Rejection and Waiver:  The City reserves the right to reject any or all Proposals and to 
waive informalities and minor irregularities in Proposals received. 
 
1.16 
Award of Contract: 
 
1.16.1 When Award Occurs:  Award of contract occurs when a Purchase Order is issued or 
other evidence of acceptance by the City is provided to the Offeror.  A Recommendation of 
Award does not constitute award of contract. 
 
1.16.2 Award:  If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the responsive and 
responsible Offeror whose Proposal conforming to this RFP will be most advantageous to 
the City as set forth in the Evaluation Criteria. 
 
1.17 
Cancellation:  This RFP may be canceled for any reasons and any and all Proposals may be 
rejected in whole or in part when it is in the best interests of the City. 
 
1.18 
Negotiations:  Negotiations may be conducted with the Offeror(s) recommended for award 
of contract. 
 
1.19 
City-Furnished Property:  No material, labor, or facilities will be furnished by the City 
unless otherwise provided for in this RFP. 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
9
 
1.20 
Proprietary Data:    
 
 
1.20.1 The file and any documents relating to this RFP, including the Proposals submitted by 
Offerors, shall be open to public inspection after the recommendation of award of a contract has 
been approved by the Mayor, or his designee.  An Offeror may designate material as Trade Secrets, 
Proprietary Data, and/or other Confidential Data by separating that material from the Offeror’s main 
Proposal, marking it as “Trade Secret”, “Proprietary Data”, or “Confidential Data” and uploading it 
separately from its main Proposal submitted in response to this RFP.   Pricing and makes and 
models or catalog numbers of items offered, delivery terms, and terms of payment shall not be 
so designated. Further, any Proposal in which a majority of pages are designated as Trade 
Secret, Proprietary Data, or Confidential Data may be deemed nonresponsive.    
 
 
1.20.2 The City will endeavor to restrict distribution of material separated, designated as 
“Trade Secret”, “Proprietary Data”, or “Confidential Data” and provided separately to only those 
individuals involved in the review and analysis of the Proposals.  However, Offers are advised that, 
if a request for inspection of records under the New Mexico Inspection of Public Records Act 
(Sections 14-2-1 et seq, NMSA 1978) (“Act”) is received for such materials, and they are not exempt 
under the Act, the City is required to disclose those records.  The City shall, to the extent possible 
under the Act, provide the Offeror with notice before any disclosure to allow the Offeror on 
opportunity, within the Act’s fifteen (15) day deadline, to initiate legal action (such as an injunction 
or other judicial remedy) to prevent the release of Trade Secret, Proprietary Data, or Confidential 
Data, should the Offeror wish to do so.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the 
City shall not be responsible to the Offeror for any disclosure of records required by the Act or 
an order of a court or other tribunal with jurisdiction over the City.  .   
 
1.21 
Preferences:  Preferences for local, small and resident or Veterans (state) businesses may be 
available under the City of Albuquerque Public Purchases Ordinance, for this procurement.  See Part 
5 of this RFP for additional information.   
 
1.22 
Request for Proposals Protest Process: 
 
1.22.1 When:  If the protest concerns the specifications for a competitive solicitation or 
other matters pertaining to the solicitation documents, it must be received by the Chief 
Procurement Officer no later than 5:00 p.m. of the tenth business day prior to the deadline 
for the receipt of Proposals. 
 
1.22.2 Recommendation of Award:  If the protest concerns other matters relating to this 
solicitation, the protest must be filed with the Chief Procurement Officer no later than 5:00 
p.m. of the tenth business day after the receipt of notice of the Recommendation of Award. 
 
1.22.3 Timely Protests:  Protests must be received by the Chief Procurement Officer prior 
to the appropriate deadline as set out herein, or they will not be considered valid.  The Chief 
Procurement Officer may waive the deadline for good cause, including a delay caused by the 
fault of the City.  Late delivery by the U.S. Postal Service or other carrier shall not be 
considered good cause. 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
10
 
1.22.4 How to File:  Any Offeror who is aggrieved in connection with a competitive 
solicitation or recommendation of award of a contract may protest to the City Chief 
Procurement Officer.  The protest shall be addressed to the Chief Procurement Officer, must 
be submitted in written form and must be legible.  Protests may be hand-delivered or mailed. 
 Facsimile, telephonic, telegraphic or electronic protests will not be accepted. 
 
1.22.5 Required Information:  The protest shall contain at a minimum the following; 
 
• The name and address of the protesting party; 
• The number of the competitive solicitation; 
• A clear statement of the reason(s) for the protest detailing the provisions believed to 
have been violated; 
• Details concerning the facts, which support the protest; 
• Attachments of any written evidence available to substantiate the claims of the 
protest; and 
• A statement specifying the ruling requested. 
 
1.22.6 Address Letters and Envelopes as Follows: 
 
• City of Albuquerque   
 
RFP Number 
• Purchasing Division  
 
PROTEST 
• Attn: Chief Procurement Officer 
• PO Box 1293  
 
 
 
• Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103 
 
1.22.7 Protest Response by Chief Procurement Officer:   The Chief Procurement Officer 
will, after evaluation of a protest, issue a response.  Only the issues outlined in the written 
protest will be considered by the Chief Procurement Officer. 
 
1.22.8 Protest Hearing:  If a hearing is requested, the request must be included in the 
protest and received within the time limit.  The filing fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) must 
accompany the request for hearing.  Only the issues outlined in the protest will be considered 
by the Chief Procurement Officer, or may be raised at a protest hearing.  The granting of a 
hearing shall be at the discretion of the Chief Procurement Officer following review of the 
request. 
 
1.23 
Insurance 
 
1.23.1 General Conditions:  The City will require the successful Offeror, referred to as the 
Contractor, to procure and maintain at its expense during the term of the contract resulting 
from the RFP, insurance in the kinds and amounts hereinafter provided with insurance 
companies authorized to do business in the State of New Mexico, covering all operations of 
the Contractor under the contract.  Upon execution of the contract and on the renewal of all 
coverages, the Contractor shall furnish to the City a certificate or certificates in form 
satisfactory to the City as well as the rider or endorsement showing that it has complied with 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
11
these insurance requirements. All certificates of insurance shall provide that thirty (30) days 
written notice be given to the Risk Manager, Department of Finance and Administrative 
Services, City of Albuquerque, P.O. Box 470, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 87103, before a 
policy is canceled, materially changed, or not renewed. Various types of required insurance 
may be written in one or more policies.  With respect to all coverages required other than 
professional liability or workers’ compensation, the City shall be named an additional 
insured.  All coverages afforded shall be primary with respect to operations provided. 
 
1.23.2  Approval of Insurance:  Even though the Contractor may have been given notice to 
proceed, it shall not begin any work under the contract resulting from this RFP until the 
required insurance has been obtained and the proper certificates (or policies) filed with the 
City.  Neither approval nor failure to disapprove certificates, policies, or the insurance by the 
City shall relieve the Contractor of full responsibility to maintain the required insurance in 
full force and effect.  If part of the contract is sublet, the Contractor shall include any or all 
subcontractors in its insurance policies, or require the subcontractor to secure insurance to 
protect itself against all hazards enumerated herein, which are not covered by the 
Contractor's insurance policies. 
 
1.23.3 Coverage Required:  The kinds and amounts of insurance required are as follows: 
 
1.23.3.1  Commercial General Liability Insurance.  A commercial general liability 
insurance policy with combined limits of liability for bodily injury or property 
damage as follows: 
 
 
$1,000,000 
 
Per Occurrence 
 
$1,000,000 
 
Policy Aggregate 
 
$1,000,000 
 
Products Liability/Completed Operations 
 
$1,000,000 
 
Personal and Advertising Injury 
 
$   50,000 
 
Fire Legal 
 
$    5,000 
 
Medical Payments 
 
Said policy of insurance must include coverage for all operations performed for the 
City by the Contractor and contractual liability coverage shall specifically insure the 
hold harmless provisions of the contract resulting from this RFP. 
 
1.23.3.2  Automobile Liability Insurance.  A comprehensive automobile liability 
insurance policy with liability limits in amounts not less than $1,000,000 combined 
single limit of liability for bodily injury, including death, and property damage in any 
one occurrence.  The policy must include coverage for the use of all owned, 
non-owned, hired automobiles, vehicles and other equipment both on and off work. 
 
1.23.3.3  Workers' Compensation Insurance.  Workers' compensation insurance 
policy for the Contractor's employees, in accordance with the provisions of the 
Workers' Compensation Act of the State of New Mexico, (the "Act").  If the 
Contractor employs fewer than three employees and has determined that it is not 
subject to the Act, it will certify, in a signed statement, that it is not subject to the 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
12
Act.  The Contractor will notify the City and comply with the Act should it employ 
three or more persons during the term of the contract resulting from this RFP. 
 
1.23.4 Increased Limits:  During the life of the contract the City may require the 
Contractor to increase the maximum limits of any insurance required herein.  In the event 
that the Contractor is so required to increase the limits of such insurance, an appropriate 
adjustment in the contract amount will be made. 
 
1.23.5 Additional Insurance:  The City may, as a condition of award of a contract, require a 
successful Offeror to carry additional types of insurance.  The type and limit of additional 
insurance is dependent upon the type of services provided via the contract by the successful 
Offeror. 
 
1.24 
Pay Equity Documentation.  All Proposals shall include a Pay Equity Reporting Form 
which 
can 
be 
accessed 
at 
http://www.cabq.gov/womens-pay-equity-task-force-
instructions/albuquerque-pay-equity-initiative-instructions or in the Solicitation Instructions.  
Offerors who believe they are exempt because they are an out-of-state contractor that has no 
facilities and no employees working in New Mexico are not required to report data, but must check 
the box verifying their status on the Pay Equity Reporting Form.  Any Proposal that does not include 
a Pay Equity Reporting Form shall be deemed nonresponsive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
{INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK} 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
13
PART 2 
PROPOSAL FORMAT 
 
2.1 
Technical Proposal Format, Section One 
 
2.1.1 Offeror Identification:  State name and address of your organization or office and 
nature of organization (individual, partnership or corporation, private or public, profit or 
non-profit).  Subcontractors, if any, must be identified in a similar manner.  Include name 
and telephone number of person(s) in your organization authorized to execute the Draft 
Agreement.  Submit a statement of compliance with all laws stated herein.  Submit a 
statement of agreement of the terms and conditions of the Draft Agreement; state exceptions. 
Show receipt of Addenda if applicable.  Provide a statement or show ability to carry the 
insurance specified. 
 
2.1.2 Experience:  
  
2.1.2.1 Experience and Qualifications: State relevant experience and qualifications of the 
company and person(s) who will be actively engaged in the proposed project, including 
experience of subcontractors.  Submit resumes demonstrating relevant qualifications for the 
individuals who will be performing the services for the City. 
  
2.1.2.2 Give examples of specific projects where Offeror has worked with communities on 
TOD planning. 
 
2.1.2.3 Provide information about where Offeror has worked on social equity and/or 
economic inclusion strategies as part of TOD or similar planning efforts. 
  
2.1.2.4 Government Experience.  State relevant experience with and knowledge of federal 
requirements and regulations related to federally funded planning activities. 
 
2.1.3 References:  Provide at least three (3) professional reference letters and contact information, 
at least two (2) of which should be from people involved with the Offeror on similar projects related 
to this request, and identified as such. 
 
2.1.4 Project Management.  Delineate the project management and other staff who will work 
directly on the Scope of Services, including summary biographies and relevant professional 
experience.      
  
2.1.5 Description of the strategic approach: 
  
2.1.5.1 Provide an overview of how Offeror’s response will reliably advance the City’s goals 
of $2 billion and $1 billion ROI in the Central Corridor in ten (10) years and a description of 
how the Scope of Services in Part 3 will be accomplished by the Offeror.  
 
2.1.6 Project Timeline: Delineate a proposed Project Timeline, with calendar dates, tasks and sub 
tasks identified. Note that a Fall 2016 execution of the majority of the stakeholder outreach activities 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
14
is strongly preferred. 
 
2.1.7 Offerors are welcome to respond individually or in teams:  If the City awards a 
contract to more than one Offeror, the chosen entities will be required to contractually agree to 
collaborate with each other in carrying out the Scope of Services for the City. 
 
2.1.8 Page Limits:  The technical proposal should be limited to a maximum of twenty (20) text 
pages, not including the cover page, table of contents or Project Timeline.  A minimum of one 
copy each of up to two TOD work products may be submitted as an Appendix to the proposal 
submitted and will not be included in the page maximum count. One sample TOD work product 
should be included with the hard copies submitted; additional TOD work products can be 
included as a soft copy only. 
 
2.2 
Cost Proposal Format, Section Two 
 
2.2.1 Total Cost:  Submit your Cost Proposal separately from your technical Proposal. 
Follow the sample format in Appendix A. 
 
2.2.2 The Cost Proposal should, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
 
• The cost for the entire project broken down by the tasks and subtasks shown 
on the Project Timeline. 
 
• Cost or pricing details should be shown by task and sub task.  This might 
include, but is not limited to: 
 
• 
Hours by task, assigned staff persons and hourly rates. Rates are to 
include all overhead and profit. 
 
• 
Purchased materials (note any applicable federal guidance or 
regulations). 
 
• 
Travel, lodging, and other direct expenses. 
 
2.2.3 Offerors should show detailed costs by task and number of hours dedicated to each 
task as listed in the specifications.  
 
2.2.4 All Costs:  All costs to be incurred and billed to the City should be described by the 
Offeror for each item, to allow for a clear evaluation and comparison, relative to other 
Proposals received.  All costs should include any applicable gross receipts taxes.  The 
Offeror should understand that the City will not pay for any amounts not included in the cost 
Proposal -- for example, insurance or taxes -- and that liability for items not included remains 
with the Offeror. 
 
 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
15
{INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK} 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
16
PART 3 
SCOPE OF SERVICES 
 
This Scope of Services is sought to fulfil several subtasks outlined in “Task 2.0” described in the 
City’s TOD Planning Grant Application to USDOT (See Appendix D), with additional requirements 
and amplifications described below. 
 
3.1 Scope 
 
3.1.1 Review and analyze: 
 
3.1.1.1 Compiled material provided by the City (anticipated to include an inventory of 
existing character; relevant area plans & studies in the past five (5) years; 
usability/connectivity assessments/audits; among others.) 
 
3.1.1.2 Completed background studies expected to be completed by other contractors by 
September 2016, including Construction Cost report, Gentrification report, and Infrastructure 
Needs report. Use these and other constraints to temper scenarios to be developed for 
stakeholder consideration and eventual recommendations. 
 
3.1.1.3 Identify any additional information that the Offeror feels is pertinent to the project. 
Demonstrate why this information is necessary. 
 
3.1.2 Develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan [Deliverable] to include how the effort will be 
organized, any phases, strategies for stakeholder identification, and the anticipated number and types 
of events for in-depth engagement with multiple feedback loops. For each of these elements, 
describe the relative level of effort by staffing and budget. 
 
3.1.2.1 Describe how scenarios will be developed and reviewed to build toward stakeholder 
consensus focusing on feasible strategies that have the most potential to contribute to the 
development ROI goals given market and other conditions. 
 
3.1.2.2 Describe the envisioned communications strategy and capacities needed to ensure 
broad awareness of, and inclusion in, the outreach and consensus efforts. Identify proposed 
roles for consultant team and City staff roles and responsibilities. 
 
3.1.3 Identify station areas for in-depth study and analysis.     
 
3.1.3.1 Identify how many, which specific station areas will receive in depth attention, and 
why.  
 
3.1.3.2 Describe how corridor-wide recommendations will address all station areas and/or 
station types throughout the corridor (e.g. downtown, urban neighborhood and town center 
used in the Center for Neighborhood Technology report, or other such classification). 
 
3.1.4 Develop and document concept [Deliverable] for station areas of focus, and other station areas 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
17
by type, developed with and supported by sufficient number and or types of public engagement 
participants. Concept shall include strategies to achieve station area goals and desired outcomes, 
feasible pathways to implementation, and identification of constraints and barriers to success.  
Develop format for conveying the resulting vision to stakeholders and others over time.  Station plan 
area concept shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
 
3.1.4.1 Addressing “last mile” multi-modal connections,  
 
3.1.4.2 Proposing mixed use and affordable housing sites and strategies,  
 
3.1.4.3 Determining circulation and parking (including shared parking 
opportunities, and the location and timing of needed parking structures.  
 
3.1.4.4 Noting the issues and potential solutions of infrastructure issues identified.  
 
3.1.4.5 Identifying other aspects determined vital to the concept implementation  
 
3.1.5 Provide a Strategies Report [Deliverable] with recommendations supported by the public 
engagement process (and measures to track their progress over time) to realistically achieve the 
desired $2B/$1B goals including: 
 
3.1.5.1 Any needed changes to draft regulatory documents (ABC->Z) 
 
3.1.5.2 Design considerations 
 
3.1.5.3 Identification of key opportunities 
 
3.1.5.4 The removal of barriers (including public policies and private practices, as 
applicable) 
 
3.1.5.5 Anticipated utility needs and parking 
 
3.1.5.6 The creation of incentives toward highest yield development 
 
3.1.5.7 Potential private sector and other partnerships 
 
3.1.5.8 Prioritized public sector project pipelines for various investments brought to 
light during the process, as well as needed public sector financing and 
funding mechanisms. 
 
3.1.5.9 Equity and economic inclusion considerations 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
18
 
PART 4 
EVALUATION OF PROPOSALS 
 
4.1 
Selection Process.  The Mayor of Albuquerque shall name, for the purpose of evaluating the 
Proposals, an Ad Hoc Advisory Committee.  On the basis of the evaluation criteria established in 
this RFP, the committee shall submit to the Mayor a list of qualified firms in the order in which they 
are recommended.  Proposal documentation requirements set forth in this RFP are designed to 
provide guidance to the Offeror concerning the type of documentation that will be used by the Ad 
Hoc Advisory Committee.  Offerors should be prepared to respond to requests by the Purchasing 
Office on behalf of the Ad Hoc Advisory Committee for oral presentations, facility surveys, 
demonstrations or other areas deemed necessary to assist in the detailed evaluation process.  Offerors 
are advised that the City, at its option, may award this request on the basis of the initial Proposals. 
 
4.2 
Evaluation Criteria.  The following general criteria, not listed in order of significance, will 
be used by the Ad Hoc Advisory Committee in recommending contract award to the Mayor.  The 
Proposal factors will be rated on a scale of  0-1000 with weight relationships as stated below. 
 
4.2.1 Evaluation Factors: 
 
450  -- Description of the strategic approach, as set forth in Part 2, Section 2.1.5. 
  
250  -- Experience and references as set forth in Part 2, Sections 2.1.2-2.1.3. 
 
200 -- The overall ability of the Offeror, as judged by the evaluation committee, to 
successfully complete the project within the proposed Project Timeline.  This judgment will 
be based upon factors such as Project Management and availability of staff and resources, 
and Project Timeline, as set forth in Part 2, Sections 2.1.4 and 2.1.6. 
  
100  --  Cost Proposal – The costs proposed by the Contractor as described in Section 2.2 of 
this RFP to perform the tasks listed in Part 3, Scope of Services.  The evaluation of this 
section will occur after the technical evaluation, based on a cost/price analysis. 
 
4.2.2 Cost/Price Factors:  The evaluation of cost factors in the selection will be 
determined by a cost/price analysis using your proposed figures.  Please note that the lowest 
cost is not the sole criterion for recommending contract award.  
 
4.2.3 Cost Evaluation.  The cost/price evaluation will be performed by the City 
Purchasing Division or designee.  A preliminary cost review will ensure that each Offeror 
has complied with all cost instructions and requirements.  In addition, Proposals will be 
examined to ensure that all proposed elements are priced and clearly presented.  Cost 
Proposals that are incomplete or reflect significant inconsistencies or inaccuracies will be 
scored accordingly or may be rejected by the Ad Hoc Advisory Committee if lacking in 
information to determine the value/price/cost relative to the services proposed. 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
19
 
 
Part 5 - Notice of NO PREFERENCES 
 
 
 
NO PREFERENCES ARE AVAILABLE FOR THIS PROCUREMENT BECAUSE: 
 
 
IT IS EXPECTED THAT THE PURCHASE OR CONCESSION CONTRACT RESULTING FROM 
THIS PROCUREMENT WILL BE IN EXCESS OF $5,000,000.  
  
 
THIS PROCUREMENT IS FOR A FEDERAL AID CONSTRUCTION PROJECT, OR INVOLVES 
THE EXPENDITURE OF FEDERAL FUNDS. 
 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
20
PART 6 
DRAFT AGREEMENT 
 
 
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this ___ day of________, 20__  by and 
between the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico  a municipal corporation, (hereinafter referred to as 
the "City"), and _____________________________, hereinafter referred to as the "Contractor"), a 
_________________, whose address is ________________________________. 
 
RECITALS 
 
 
WHEREAS, the City issued a Request For Proposals for the Economic Development 
Department, P2017000001, titled “ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning”, which is Exhibit A to this 
Agreement; and 
 
 
WHEREAS, the Contractor submitted its Proposal, dated ________________, in response to 
P2017000001, ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning which Proposal is Exhibit B to this Agreement; 
and 
 
 
WHEREAS, the City desires to engage the Contractor to render certain services in 
connection therewith, and the Contractor is willing to provide such services. 
 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and mutual obligations herein, the 
parties hereto do mutually agree as follows: 
 
 
1. 
Scope of Services.  The Contractor shall perform the following services (hereinafter 
the "Services") in a satisfactory and proper manner, as determined by the City: 
  
Provide TOD planning and stakeholder outreach services, in accordance with Exhibit A as 
supplemented by Exhibit B. 
 
 
2.   
Time of Performance.  Services of the Contractor shall commence on the date of 
final execution of this Agreement and shall be undertaken and completed in such sequence as to 
assure their expeditious completion in light of the purposes of this Agreement; provided, however, 
that in any event, all of the Services required hereunder shall be completed within one year of the 
date of execution of this Agreement.   
      
 
3. 
Compensation and Method of Payment.   
 
 
A. 
Compensation.   For performing the Services specified in Section 1 hereof, 
the City agrees to pay the Contractor up to the amount of ________________________ 
Dollars ($_______), which amount includes any applicable gross receipts taxes and which amount 
shall constitute full and complete compensation for the Contractor's Services under this Agreement, 
including all expenditures made and expenses incurred by the Contractor in performing such 
Services. 
 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
21
 
B. 
Method of Payment.  Such amount shall be paid to the Contractor in 
installments, which include any applicable gross receipts taxes, as follows:  TBD.   Payments shall 
be made to the Contractor upon completion of each task, upon receipt by the City of a properly 
documented requisition for payment as determined by the budgetary and fiscal guidelines of the City 
and on the condition that the Contractor has accomplished the Services to the satisfaction of the City. 
 
 
C. 
Appropriations.  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Agreement, 
the terms of this Agreement are contingent upon the City Council of the City of Albuquerque 
making the appropriations necessary for the performance of this Agreement.  If sufficient 
appropriations and authorizations are not made by the City Council, this Agreement may be 
terminated at the end of the City's then current fiscal year upon written notice given by the City to 
the Contractor.  Such event shall not constitute an event of default.  All payment obligations of the 
City and all of its interest in this Agreement will cease upon the date of termination.  The City's 
decision as to whether sufficient appropriations are available shall be accepted by the Contractor and 
shall be final. 
 
 
4. 
Independent Contractor.  The Contractor is considered as an independent contractor 
at all times in the performance of the services described in Section 1.  The Contractor further agrees 
that neither it nor its employees are entitled to any benefits from the City under the provisions of the 
Workers' Compensation Act of the State of New Mexico, or to any of the benefits granted to 
employees of the City under the provisions of the Merit System Ordinance as now enacted or 
hereafter amended. 
 
 
5. 
Personnel. 
 
 
A. 
The Contractor represents that it has, or will secure at its own expense, all 
personnel required in performing all of the Services required under this Agreement.  Such personnel 
shall not be employees of or have any contractual relationships with the City. 
 
 
B. 
All the Services required hereunder will be performed by the Contractor or 
under its supervision and all personnel engaged in the work shall be fully qualified and shall be 
authorized or permitted under state and local law to perform such Services. 
 
 
C. 
None of the work or Services covered by this Agreement shall be 
subcontracted without the prior written approval of the City.  Any work or Services subcontracted 
hereunder shall be specified by written contract or agreement and shall be subject to each provision 
of this Agreement. 
 
 
6. 
Indemnity.  The Contractor agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City 
and its officials, agents and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, suits or 
proceedings of any kind brought against said parties because of any injury or damage received or 
sustained by any person, persons or property to the extent arising out of or resulting from the 
negligent acts, errors, omissions, and performance by the Contractor under this Agreement or by 
reason of any asserted act or omission, neglect or misconduct of the Contractor or Contractor's 
agents or employees or any subcontractor or its agents or employees.  The indemnity required 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
22
hereunder shall not be limited by reason of the specification of any particular insurance coverage in 
this Agreement. 
 
 
7.  
Insurance.  The Contractor shall not commence any work under this Agreement until 
the insurances required in Exhibit A, Section 1.23 have been obtained and the proper certificates and 
riders or endorsements (or policies) have been submitted to the City. 
 
 
8. 
Discrimination Prohibited.  In performing the Services required hereunder, the 
Contractor shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of race, color, religion, gender, 
sexual preference, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry, age, physical handicap or 
disability, as defined in the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, as currently enacted or 
hereafter amended. 
 
 
9. 
ADA Compliance.  In performing the Services required hereunder, the Contractor 
agrees to meet all the requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (the "ADA"), 
which are imposed directly on the Contractor or which would be imposed on the City as a public 
entity.  The Contractor agrees to be responsible for knowing all applicable rules and requirements of 
the ADA and to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officials, agents and employees 
from and against any and all claims, actions, suits or proceedings of any kind brought against said 
parties as a result of any acts or omissions of the Contractor or its agents in violation of the ADA. 
 
 
10. 
Reports and Information.  At such times and in such forms as the City may require, 
there shall be furnished to the City such statements, records, reports, data and information, as the 
City may request pertaining to matters covered by this Agreement.  Unless authorized by the City, 
the Contractor will not release any information concerning the work product including any reports or 
other documents prepared pursuant to the Agreement until the final product is submitted to the City.  
 
11. 
Open Meetings Requirements.  Any nonprofit organization in the City which 
receives funds appropriated by the City, or which has as a member of its governing body an elected 
official, or appointed administrative official, as a representative of the City, is subject to the 
requirements of §2-5-1 et seq. R.O.A. 1994, Public Interest Organizations.  The Contractor agrees to 
comply with all such requirements, if applicable.  
 
 
12. 
Establishment and Maintenance of Records.  Records shall be maintained by the 
Contractor in accordance with applicable law and requirements prescribed by the City with respect 
to all matters covered by this Agreement.  Except as otherwise authorized by the City, such records 
shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years after receipt of final payment under this 
Agreement. 
 
13. 
Audits and Inspections.  At any time during normal business hours and as often as 
the City may deem necessary, there shall be made available to the City for examination all of the 
Contractor's records with respect to all matters covered by this Agreement.  The Contractor shall 
permit the City to audit, examine, and make excerpts or transcripts from such records, and to make 
audits of all contracts, invoices, materials, payrolls, records of personnel, conditions of employment 
and other data relating to all matters covered by this Agreement.  The Contractor understands and 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
23
will comply with the City’s Accountability in Government Ordinance, §2-10-1 et seq. R.O.A. 1994, 
and also agrees to provide requested information and records and appear as a witness in hearings for 
the City's Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices pursuant to Article XII, Section 8 of the 
Albuquerque City Charter. 
  
 
14. 
Publication, Reproduction and Use of Material.  No material produced in whole or 
in part under this Agreement shall be subject to copyright in the United States or in any other 
country.  The City shall have unrestricted authority to publish, disclose, distribute and otherwise use, 
in whole or in part, any reports, data or other materials prepared under this Agreement. 
 
 
15. 
Compliance with Laws.  In providing the Scope of  Services outlined herein, the 
Contractor shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, and codes of the federal, State, and 
local governments. 
 
 
16. 
Changes.  The City may, from time to time, request changes in the Scope of Services 
of the Contractor to be performed hereunder. Such changes, including any increase or decrease in the 
amount of the Contractor's compensation, which are mutually agreed upon by and between the City 
and the Contractor, shall be incorporated in written amendments to this Agreement. 
 
 
17. 
Assignability.  The Contractor shall not assign any interest in this Agreement and 
shall not transfer any interest in this Agreement (whether by assignment or novation), without the 
prior written consent of the City thereto. 
 
 
18. 
Termination for Cause.  If, through any cause, the Contractor shall fail to  
fulfill in a timely and proper manner its obligation under this Agreement or if the Contractor shall 
violate any of the covenants, agreements, or stipulations of this Agreement, the City shall thereupon 
have the right to terminate this Agreement by giving five (5) days written notice to the Contractor of 
such termination and specifying the effective date of such termination.  In such event, all finished or 
unfinished documents, data, and reports prepared by the Contractor under this Agreement shall, at 
the option of the City, become its property, and the Contractor shall be entitled to receive just and 
equitable compensation for any work satisfactorily completed hereunder.  Notwithstanding the 
above, the Contractor shall not be relieved of liability to the City for damages sustained by the City 
by virtue of any breach of this Agreement by the Contractor, and the City may withhold any 
payments to the Contractor for the purposes of set-off until such time as the exact amount of 
damages due the City from the Contractor is determined. 
 
 
19. 
Termination for Convenience of City.  The City may terminate this Agreement at 
any time by giving at least fifteen (15) days notice in writing to the Contractor.  If the Contractor is 
terminated by the City as provided herein, the Contractor will be paid an amount which bears the 
same ratio to the total compensation as the Services actually performed bear to the total Services of 
the Contractor covered by this Agreement, less payments of compensation previously made.  If this 
Agreement is terminated due to the fault of the Contractor, the preceding section hereof relative to 
termination shall apply. 
 
 
20. 
Construction and Severability.  If any part of this Agreement is held to be invalid or 


P2017000001, "ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning" 
 
24
unenforceable, such holding will not affect the validity or enforceability of any other part of this 
Agreement so long as the remainder of the Agreement is reasonably capable of completion. 
 
 
21. 
Enforcement.  The Contractor agrees to pay to the City all costs and expenses 
including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City in exercising any of its rights or remedies in 
connection with the enforcement of this Agreement. 
 
 
22. 
Entire Agreement.  This Agreement contains the entire agreement of the parties and 
supersedes any and all other agreements or understandings, oral or written, whether previous to the 
execution hereof or contemporaneous herewith.  Exhibits A and B, attached hereto, are hereby made 
a part of this Agreement. 
 
 
24. 
Applicable Law.  This Agreement shall be governed by and construed and enforced 
in accordance with the laws of the State of New Mexico, and the laws, rules and regulations of the 
City of Albuquerque. 
 
 
25. 
Approval Required.  This Agreement shall not become effective or binding until 
approved by the City's Chief Administrative Officer. 
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City and the Contractor have executed this Agreement as of 
the date first above written. 
 
CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE 
 
 
CONTRACTOR: 
 
 
Approved By: 
 
 
 
 
By: ________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________ 
 
Title: _____________________________ 
Chief Administrative Officer       
 
 
 
 
Date: _____________________________ 
Date: _________________________ 
 
 
______________________________, Director 
 
 
 
Economic Development Department 
 
Date: _________________________ 
 
 


A-1 
Appendix A  
Cost Proposal Form 
 
Task 1 (As defined by Offeror): 
 
 
 
Any sub tasks (As defined by Offeror): 
 
 
 
 
Personnel assigned to task (or sub task) 
Fully loaded hourly rate 
# of Hours for sub task 
Total Hours 
Total Cost 
1 
  
  
  
  
  
2, etc   
  
  
  
  
 
Expenses by Task (list, if any) 
  
  
  
  
 
Task 1 Total 
  
  
  
  
Task 2 (As defined by Offeror): 
Any sub tasks (As defined by Offeror): 
 
 
 
 
Personnel assigned to task (or sub task) 
Fully loaded hourly rate 
# of Hours for sub task 
Total Hours 
Total Cost 
1 
  
  
  
  
  
2, etc   
  
  
  
  
 
Expenses by Task  (list, if any) 
  
  
  
  
 
Task 2 Total 
  
  
  
  
Additional Tasks (as defined by Offeror)—Please follow same format as delineated in Tasks 1 and 2 above: 
Other Expenses (Travel, lodging and other direct expenses) 
1 
  
  
  
  
2, etc   
  
  
  
  
Total Other Expenses 
  
  
Grand Total 
  
 
 
_______ % of this grand total is to be fulfilled by DBE Firm(s) (See Appendix C #28, on page 33) 


B-1 
 
 
Appendix B 
 
Federal Requirements and Forms 
 
Federal Transit Administration 
Required Contract Clauses and Certifications 
 
1. 
Fly America. The Contractor shall comply with 49 U.S.C. 40118 (The  “Fly 
America” Act) in accordance with the General Services Administration’s regulations at 41 
GFR Part 301-10, which provide the recipients and sub-recipients of federal funds and their 
Contractors are required to use U.S. Flag air carriers for U.S. Government financed 
international air travel and transportation of their personal effects or property, to the extent 
such service is available, unless traveled by a foreign air carrier is a matter of necessity, as 
defined by the Fly America Act. The Contractor shall submit, if a foreign air carrier is used, 
an appropriate certification or memorandum adequately explaining why service by a U.S. 
Flag air carrier was not available or why it was necessary to use a foreign air carrier and 
shall, in any event, provide certificate of compliance with the Fly America requirements. The 
Contractor agrees to include the requirements of this section in all subcontracts that may 
involve international air transportation. 
  
2. 
Buy America - N/A 
 
3. 
Charter Bus and School Bus -  N/A 
 
4. 
Cargo Preference – Required for transportation of materials by ocean vessels -
 N/A 
 
5. 
Seismic Safety. N/A 
 
6. 
Energy Conservation Measures. The Contractor agrees to comply with mandatory 
standards and policies relating to energy efficiency that are contained in the state energy 
conservation plan issued in compliance with the Energy Policy and Conservation Act.  
 
7. 
Clean Water Requirements. The Contractor agrees to comply with all applicable 
standards, orders or regulations issued pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 
as amended, 33 U.S.C 1251 et seq. The Contractor agrees to report each violation to the 
Owner and understands and agrees that the Owner will, in turn, report each violation as 
required to assure notification to FTA and appropriate EPA Regional Office. The Contractor 
also agrees to include these requirements in each subcontract financed in whole or in part 
with Federal assistance provided by FTA.  
 
8. 
Bus Testing Certification – See Certifications -  N/A 
 
9. 
Pre-Award and Post Delivery Audit & Certification– See Certifications – N/A 
 


B-2 
 
10. 
Lobbying - Prohibition Against Use of Funds for Lobbying.  Neither the Contractor 
nor any subcontractor may use Federal assistance funds for publicity or propaganda purposes 
designed to support or defeat legislation pending before Congress. Certification of 
Restrictions on Lobbying is required with all bids or offers on FTA funded contracts.  
 
Clause and specific language therein are mandated by 49 CFR Part 19, Appendix A.  
Modifications have been made to the Clause pursuant to Section 10 of the Lobbying 
Disclosure Act of 1995, P.L. 104-65 [to be codified at 2 U.S.C. § 1601, et seq.] 
- Lobbying Certification and Disclosure of Lobbying Activities for third party contractors 
are mandated by 31 U.S.C. 1352(b)(5), as amended by Section 10 of the Lobbying 
Disclosure Act of 1995, and DOT implementing regulation, "New Restrictions on 
Lobbying," at 49 CFR § 20.110(d) 
- Language in Lobbying Certification is mandated by 49 CFR Part 19, Appendix A, Section 
7, which provides that contractors file the certification required by 49 CFR Part 20, 
Appendix A. 
Modifications have been made to the Lobbying Certification pursuant to Section 10 of the 
Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995. 
- Use of "Disclosure of Lobbying Activities," Standard Form-LLL set forth in Appendix B 
of 49 CFR Part 20, as amended by "Government wide Guidance For New Restrictions on 
Lobbying," 61 Fed. Reg. 1413 (1/19/96) is mandated by 49 CFR Part 20, Appendix A. 
Contractors who apply or bid for an award of $100,000 or more shall file the certification 
required by 49 CFR part 20, "New Restrictions on Lobbying." Each tier certifies to the tier 
above that it will not and has not used Federal appropriated funds to pay any person or 
organization for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any 
agency, a member of Congress, officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a 
member of Congress in connection with obtaining any Federal contract, grant or any other 
award covered by 31 U.S.C. 1352. Each tier shall also disclose the name of any registrant 
under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 who has made lobbying contacts on its behalf 
with non-Federal funds with respect to that Federal contract, grant or award covered by 31 
U.S.C. 1352. Such disclosures are forwarded from tier to tier up to the recipient. 
 
11. 
Access to Records and Reports. The Contractor shall comply with requirements of 
49 U.S.C. 5325 18 CFR 18.36 (i) 49 CFR 633.17. The Contractor agrees to provide the City, 
the FTA Administrator, the Comptroller General of the United States or any of their 
authorized representatives access to any books, documents, papers and records of the 
Contractor which are directly pertinent to this contract for the purposes of making audits, 
examinations, excerpts and transcriptions. 
 
The following access to records requirements apply to this Contract:  
 
a. 
Where the Purchaser is not a State but a local government and is the FTA 
Recipient or a subgrantee of the FTA Recipient in accordance with 49 C. F. R. 18.36(i), the 
Contractor agrees to provide the Purchaser, the FTA Administrator, the Comptroller General 
of the United States or any of their authorized representatives access to any books, 
documents, papers and records of the Contractor which are directly pertinent to this contract 
for the purposes of making audits, examinations, excerpts and transcriptions. Contractor also 


B-3 
 
agrees, pursuant to 49 C. F. R. 633.17 to provide the FTA Administrator or his authorized 
representatives including any PMO Contractor access to Contractor's records and 
construction sites pertaining to a major capital project, defined at 49 U.S.C. 5302(a)1, which 
is receiving federal financial assistance through the programs described at 49 U.S.C. 5307, 
5309 or 5311. 
 
b. 
Where the Purchaser is a State and is the FTA Recipient or a subgrantee of the 
FTA Recipient in accordance with 49 C.F.R. 633.17, Contractor agrees to provide the 
Purchaser, the FTA Administrator or his authorized representatives, including any PMO 
Contractor, access to the Contractor's records and construction sites pertaining to a major 
capital project, defined at 49 U.S.C. 5302(a)1, which is receiving federal financial assistance 
through the programs described at 49 U.S.C. 5307, 5309 or 5311. By definition, a major 
capital project excludes contracts of less than the simplified acquisition threshold currently 
set at $100,000. 
 
c. 
Where the Purchaser enters into a negotiated contract for other than a small 
purchase or under the simplified acquisition threshold and is an institution of higher 
education, a hospital or other non-profit organization and is the FTA Recipient or a 
subgrantee of the FTA Recipient in accordance with 49 C.F.R. 19.48, Contractor agrees to 
provide the Purchaser, FTA Administrator, the Comptroller General of the United States or 
any of their duly authorized representatives with access to any books, documents, papers and 
record of the Contractor which are directly pertinent to this contract for the purposes of 
making audits, examinations, excerpts and transcriptions. 
 
d. 
Where any Purchaser which is the FTA Recipient or a subgrantee of the FTA 
Recipient in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 5325(a) enters into a contract for a capital project or 
improvement (defined at 49 U.S.C. 5302(a)1) through other than competitive bidding, the 
Contractor shall make available records related to the contract to the Purchaser, the Secretary 
of Transportation and the Comptroller General or any authorized officer or employee of any 
of them for the purposes of conducting an audit and inspection. 
 
e. 
The Contractor agrees to permit any of the foregoing parties to reproduce by any 
means whatsoever or to copy excerpts and transcriptions as reasonably needed. 
 
f. 
The Contractor agrees to maintain all books, records, accounts and reports 
required under this contract for a period of not less than three years after the date of 
termination or expiration of this contract, except in the event of litigation or settlement of 
claims arising from the performance of this contract, in which case Contractor agrees to 
maintain same until the Purchaser, the FTA Administrator, the Comptroller General, or any 
of their duly authorized representatives, have disposed of all such litigation, appeals, claims 
or exceptions related thereto. Reference 49 CFR 18.39(i)(11). 
 
g. 
FTA does not require the inclusion of these requirements in subcontracts.  
 


B-4 
 
Requirements for Access to Records and Reports by Types of Contract 
 
Contract 
Characteristics 
Operational 
Service 
Contract 
Turnkey 
Architectural 
Engineering 
Professional 
Services 
I State Grantees 
 
 
a. Contracts 
below SAT 
($100,000)  
b. Contracts 
above 
$100,000/Capital 
Projects 
None 
None 
unless1 
non-
competitive 
award 
Those 
imposed 
on state 
pass thru 
to 
Contractor 
None 
None unless 
non-
competitive 
award 
None 
None unless 
non-
competitive 
award 
II Non State 
Grantees  
a. Contracts 
below SAT 
($100,000)  
b. Contracts 
above 
$100,000/Capital 
Projects  
Yes3 
Yes3 
Those 
imposed 
on non-
state 
Grantee 
pass thru 
to 
Contractor 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. 
Federal Changes. Contractors shall at all times comply with all applicable FTA 
regulations, policies, procedures and directives, including without limitation those listed 
directly or by reference in the Agreement (Form FTA MA (4) dated October, 1997) between 
the City of Albuquerque and FTA, as they may be amended or promulgated from time to 
time during the term of this Agreement.  Contractor’s failure to so comply shall constitute a 
material breach of this Agreement. 
 
13. 
Bonding Requirements : N/A 
 
14. 
Clean Air. The Contractor agrees to comply with all applicable standards, orders or 
regulations issued pursuant to the Clean Air Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq. The 
Contractor agrees to report each violation to the Owner and understands and agrees that the 
Owner will, in turn, report each violation as required to assure notification to FTA and 
appropriate EPA Regional Office.  
 
15. 
Recycled Products. N/A 


B-5 
 
 
16. 
Davis Bacon/Copeland Anti-Kickback N/A 
 
17. 
Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards N/A 
 
18. 
Reserved for FTA - None 
 
19. 
No Government Obligations to Third Parties. The Contractor and the Owner 
acknowledge and agree that, notwithstanding any concurrence by the Federal Government in 
or approval of the solicitation or award of the underlying contract, absent the express written 
consent by the Federal Government, the Federal Government is not a party to this contract 
and shall not be subject to any obligations or liabilities to the Owner, Contractor, or any other 
party (whether or not a party to that contract) pertaining to any matter resulting from the 
underlying contract. The Contractor agrees to include the above clause in each subcontract 
financed in whole or in part with Federal assistance provided by FTA. It is further agreed that 
the clause shall not be modified, except to identify the subcontractor who will be subject to 
its provisions. 
 
20. 
Program Fraud and False or Fraudulent Statements and Related Acts.   The 
Contractor acknowledges that the provisions of the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 
1986, as amended, 31 U.S.C. § 3801 et seq. and U.S. DOT regulations, "Program Fraud Civil 
Remedies," 49 C.F.R. Part 31, apply to its actions pertaining to this Project. Upon execution 
of the underlying contract, the Contractor certifies or affirms the truthfulness and accuracy of 
any statement it has made, it makes, it may make, or causes to be made, pertaining to the 
underlying contract or the FTA assisted project for which this contract work is being 
performed. In addition to other penalties that may be applicable, the Contractor further 
acknowledges that if it makes, or causes to be made, a false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim, 
statement, submission, or certification, the Federal Government reserves the right to impose 
the penalties of the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 1986 on the Contractor to the 
extent the Federal Government deems appropriate. The Contractor agrees to include the 
above two clauses in each subcontract finance in whole or in part with Federal assistance 
provided by the FTA. It is further agreed that the clause shall not be modified, except to 
identify the subcontractor who will be subject to its provisions. 
 
21. 
Termination (Included in CONTRACT) 
 
22. 
Debarment and Suspension. This contract is a covered transaction for purposed 
of 49 CFR Part 29. As such, the Contractor is required to verify that none of the contractor, 
its principals, as defined in 49 CFR 29.995, or affiliates, as defined at 49 CFR 29.905, are 
excluded or disqualified as defined at 49 CFR 29.940 and 29.945. The Contractor is required 
to comply with 49 CFR 29, Subpart C and must include the requirement to comply with 49 
CFR 29, Subpart C in any lower tier covered transaction it enters into. The Contractor shall 
provide certifications required by the Department of Transportation regulations, 
“Government-wide Debarment and Suspension”, 40 C.F.R Part 29, and otherwise comply 
with the requirements of those regulations. Certification is required. 
 


B-6 
 
23. 
Privacy Act  
 
The following requirements apply to the Contractor and its employees that administer any 
system of records on behalf of the Federal Government under any contract:  
(1) The Contractor agrees to comply with, and assures the compliance of its employees with, 
the information restrictions and other applicable requirements of the Privacy Act of 
1974,  
 
5 U.S.C. § 552a. Among other things, the Contractor agrees to obtain the express 
consent of the Federal Government before the Contractor or its employees operate a 
system of records on behalf of the Federal Government. The Contractor understands that 
the requirements of the Privacy Act, including the civil and criminal penalties for 
violation of that Act, apply to those individuals involved, and that failure to comply with 
the terms of the Privacy Act may result in termination of the underlying contract. 
(2) The Contractor also agrees to include these requirements in each subcontract to 
administer any system of records on behalf of the Federal Government financed in whole 
or in part with Federal assistance provided by FTA. 
 
24. 
Civil Rights Compliance.   
a. Nondiscrimination – In accordance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, as 
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d, section 3030 of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as 
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 6102, section 202 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 
U.S.C. § 12132, and Federal transit law at 49 U.S.C. § 5332, the Contractor agrees that it will 
not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, 
creed, national origin, sex, age, or disability. In addition the Contractor agrees to comply 
with applicable Federal implementing regulations and other implementing requirements FTA 
may issue.    
b. Equal Employment Opportunity – The following equal employment opportunity 
requirements may apply to the underlying contract: Race, Color, Creed, National Origin, Sex 
– In accordance with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e, and 
Federal transit laws at 49 U.S.C. § 5332, the Contractor agrees to comply with all applicable 
equal employment opportunity requirements of the U.S. Department of Labor (U.S. DOL) 
regulations, “Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment 
Opportunity, Department of Labor”, 41 C.F.R. Parts 60 et seq., (which implement Executive 
Order No. 11246, “Equal Employment Opportunity”, as amended by Executive Order No 
11375, “Amending Executive Order 11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity”, 42 
U.S.C. § 2000e note), and with any applicable Federal statutes, executive orders, regulations, 
and Federal policies that may in the future affect construction activities undertaken in the 
course of a Project. The Contractor agrees to take affirmative action to ensure that applicants 
are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their 
race, color, creed, national origin, sex, or age. Such action shall include but not be limited to, 
the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer, recruitment or recruitment 
advertising, layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection 
for training, including apprenticeship. In addition the Contractor agrees to comply with any 
implementing requirements FTA may issue.  
c. Age – In accordance with section 4 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act 
of 1967, as amended, 29 U.S.C. §§ 623 and Federal transit law at 49 U.S.C. § 5332, the 


B-7 
 
Contractor agrees to refrain from discrimination against present and prospective employees 
for reason of age. In addition the Contractor agrees to comply with any implementing 
requirements FTA may issue.  
d. Disabilities – In accordance with section 102 of the Americans with Disabilities 
Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 12112, the Contractor agrees that it will comply with the 
requirements of U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Regulations to 
Implement the Equal Employment Provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act”, 29 
C.F.R. Part 1630, pertaining to employment of persons with disabilities. In addition, the 
Contractor agrees to comply with any implementing requirements FTA may issue. The 
Contractor further agrees to include these requirements in each contract financed in whole or 
in part with Federal assistance provided by FTA, modified only if necessary to identify the 
affected parties.  
 
25. 
Breaches and Dispute Resolution - Disputes arising in the performance of this 
Contract which are not resolved by agreement of the parties shall be decided in writing by the 
authorized representative of Recipient's Department of Economic Development. This 
decision shall be final and conclusive unless within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of 
its copy, the Contractor mails or otherwise furnishes a written appeal to the Deputy Director 
of Economic Development. In connection with any such appeal, the Contractor shall be 
afforded an opportunity to be heard and to offer evidence in support of its position. The 
decision of the Deputy Director of the Recipient’s Economic Development Department shall 
be binding upon the Contractor and the Contractor shall abide be the decision. 
 
26. 
Patient and Rights Data – N/A 
 
27. 
Transit Employee Protective Agreements– N/A 
 
28. 
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise. This contract is subject to the requirements of 
Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 26, Participation by Disadvantaged Business 
Enterprises in Department of Transportation Financial Assistance Programs.  
 
The national goal for participation of Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) is 10%. The 
City’s overall goal for certified DBE participation is 5.56%. A list of certified Disadvantaged 
Business Enterprises can be obtained from the New Mexico State Highway and 
Transportation Department, Office of Equal Employment Opportunity Programs, P.O. Box 
1148, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-1148. A separate contract goal of 5.6 % DBE has not 
been established for this procurement.  
 
a. The Contractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, 
or sex in the performance of this contract. The Contractor shall carry out this DOT-assisted 
contract. Failure by the Contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this 
contract, which may result in the termination of this contract, or such other remedy as 
deemed appropriate. Each subcontract the Contractor signs with a subcontractor must include 
the assurance in the paragraph (see 49 CFR 26.13 (b)). 
b. The Contractor will be required to report its DBE participation obtained through 
race-neutral means throughout the period of performance.  


B-8 
 
 
c. The Contractor is required to pay its subcontractors performing work related to 
this contract for satisfactory performance of that work no later than 30 days after the 
Contractor’s receipt of payment for that work. In addition, the Contractor may not withhold 
retainage from its subcontractors.  
 
d. The Contractor must promptly notify the City whenever a DBE subcontractor 
performing work related to this contract is terminated or fails to complete its work, and must 
make good faith efforts to engage another DBE subcontractor to perform at least the same 
amount of work. The Contractor may not terminate any DBE subcontractor and perform that 
work through its own forces or those of an affiliate without prior written consent of the City.  
 
29. 
FTA Reserved – NONE 
 
30. 
Incorporation of Federal Transit Administration (FTA) Terms. All contractual 
provisions required by U.S. Department of Transportation, as set forth in FTA Circular 
4220.1E, and subsequent amendments are hereby incorporated by reference.  Anything to the 
contrary herein notwithstanding, all FTA mandated terms shall deemed to control in the 
event of a conflict with other provisions contained in this Contract. The Contractor shall not 
perform any act, fail to perform any act, or refuse to comply with any request, which would 
cause the City of Albuquerque to be in violation of FTA terms and conditions. 
 
31. 
Drug and Alcohol Testing  N/A


B-9 
 
CERTIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS ON LOBBYING 
 
 
I, ______________________________________, hereby certify on behalf of  
                (Name and title of Official)  
 
__________________________________________________________ that;  
                                            (Name of Firm)  
 
(1) 
No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the 
undersigned person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of an 
agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee or Member 
of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal 
grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the 
extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, 
loan or cooperative agreement.  
 
(2) 
If any funds other the Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any 
person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a 
member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of 
Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the 
undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report 
Lobbying”, in accordance with its instructions.  
 
(3) 
The undersigned shall require that the language of this certification be included in the 
award documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontracts, sub-grants, and contracts 
under grants, loans and cooperative agreements) and that all sub-recipients shall certify and 
disclose accordingly.  
 
For purposes of this Certification, the Agreement shall be considered a federal contract. This 
certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance is placed when this 
transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is prerequisite for making 
or entering into this transaction imposed by Section 1352, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to 
file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not 
more than $100,000 for each such failure.  
 
Executed this ________ day of ______________________, 20____.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
By 
 
___________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Signature of authorized official) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Title of authorized official)  
 
 
 


B-10 
 
CERTIFICATION REGARDING DEBARMENT, SUSPENSION, AND OTHER 
RESPONSIBILITY MATTERS – PRIMARY COVERED TRANSACTIONS 
 
 
The _______________________________, certifies to the best of its knowledge and  
                         (Contractor)  
belief, that it and its principals: 
 
(1) 
Are not presently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, declared  
ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from covered transactions by any Federal department or 
agency;  
 
(2) 
Have not within a three-year period preceding this contract been convicted or  
had a civil judgment against them for commission or fraud or a criminal offense in 
connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public (Federal, State or 
Local) transaction or contract under a public transaction; violation of Federal or State 
antitrust statutes or commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or 
destruction of records, making false statements or receiving stolen property;  
 
(3) 
Are not presently indicted for or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a  
governmental entity (Federal, State or Local) with commission of any of the offenses 
enumerated in paragraph (2) of this certification; and 
 
(4) 
Have not within a three-year period preceding this agreement had one or more  
public transactions (Federal, State or Local) terminated for cause or default.  
 
Where the Contractor is unable to certify to any of the statements in this certification, such 
Contractor shall attach an explanation to this certification.  
 
THE CONTRACTOR, ___________________________________ CERTIFIES OR AFFIRMS 
THE TRUTHFULNESS AND ACCURACY OF THE CONTENTS OF THE STATEMENTS 
SUBMITTED ON OR WITH THIS CERTIFICATION AND UNDERSTANDS THAT THE 
PROVISIONS OF 31 U.S.C. sub-section 3801 ET SEQ. ARE APPLICABLE THERETO.  
 
Executed this ________ day of _____________________, 20____.  
 
By 
 
___________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Signature of authorized official) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title of authorized official) 
 


C-1 
 
Appendix C 
 
Study by Center for Neighborhood Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
The Scale of the Prize  
 
 
An Analysis of Potential Development in the Albuquerque Rapid Transit Corridor  
Based on Comparisons with Development Achieved Nationally  
in Transit Station Areas and Corridors  
 
 
Prepared by the Center for Neighborhood Technology  
 
 
For the Government of the City of Albuquerque  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact:  
David Chandler  
Principal Business Analyst  
Center for Neighborhood Technology  
david@cnt.org  
773-269-4023  
2125 W North Avenue  
Chicago, IL  60647  


C-2 
 
Contents 
 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 3 
I.  Albuquerque’s Need and Opportunity for Transit-Oriented Development ............................................. 6 
A. 
Coordinating Land Use and Transportation ...................................................................................... 6 
B. 
Economic Growth and Changing Preferences .................................................................................. 9 
C. 
Capitalizing on Assets, Realizing Plans ............................................................................................ 10 
D. 
Integrating Redevelopment Efforts and Zoning.............................................................................. 11 
1. 
Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas .......................................................................................... 11 
2. 
  Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) ................................................................................ 12 
E. 
Early Albuquerque Market Developments ..................................................................................... 13 
F. 
True Rapid Transit ........................................................................................................................... 13 
G. 
Matching Comparable Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Projects in Other Cities ........................................ 15 
1. 
      BRT Investments in Comparable Cities .................................................................................. 15 
2. 
  Early Outcomes from BRT Investments in Comparable Cities .................................................. 18 
3. 
   Similarities in BRT Research Findings ....................................................................................... 21 
II. Comparative Analysis of Albuquerque’s Transit-Oriented Development Opportunity .......................... 22 
A. 
The Typology of Station Areas ........................................................................................................ 22 
B. 
Key Comparisons and Assumptions ................................................................................................ 23 
C. 
Calculations of Potential Development Scale ................................................................................. 28 
1. 
Downtown District ...................................................................................................................... 28 
2. 
Urban Neighborhood District ...................................................................................................... 31 
3. 
Town Center District ................................................................................................................... 34 
III. Findings and Recommendations ............................................................................................................ 37 
A. 
Findings ........................................................................................................................................... 37 
1. 
Discussion of Findings ................................................................................................................. 37 
2. 
Summary of Findings ................................................................................................................... 39 
B.  Recommendations ............................................................................................................................. 40 
 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-3 
 
Executive Summary    
 
Albuquerque’s planning agencies and civic leaders have long recognized a need to invest in public 
transportation that will drive adjustments in the region’s land use patterns in order to ameliorate traffic 
congestion, improve air quality, increase the region’s attraction to skilled professionals and innovative 
firms, increase workers’ access to jobs and residents’ access to services that can improve health and 
quality of life. Other regions around nation have invested in fixed guideway transit systems in order to 
achieve similar goals.  
 
The proposed Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART) is a bus rapid transit (BRT) system that will incorporate 
virtually all of the features that transit-oriented development studies, including BRT research, have 
shown are characteristic of transit systems that meet regional goals, particularly for economic 
development:  
• 
The technical features of the ART – including its permanent stations, pre-boarding fare system, 
dedicated lanes, signal priority, and service schedule -- ensure speed, reliability, and 
convenience for its customers.  
• 
The ART route -- virtually the entire length of Central Avenue -- connects relatively dense 
residential neighborhoods to centers of employment, vital services, and entertainment.  
• 
In combination the ART’s technical characteristics and route will provide reliable 
accessibility to other transit services, including multiple north-south bus routes.  
• 
The ART will make a basic contribution to numerous local government and institutional 
plans to revitalize Albuquerque’s economy and protect its environment, including the 
Preferred Scenario of the regional Long Range Transportation Plan, the expansion of the 
UNM Hospital and campus, ABQ the Plan, Innovate ABQ, STC.UNM (UNM technology transfer 
non-profit organization), the Downtown ABQ Mainstreet Initiative and the Downtown 2025 
Sector Development Plan.  
• 
The private market has shown its readiness to invest in the ART corridor through some 17 
mixed-use, multifamily building, or commercial projects that have been built in this corridor 
within the last three years, with at least 12 additional projects proposed. Several developers of 
these projects have expressed their expectation that the ART will make an important 
contribution to the success of their investments.  
 
In light of these facts, the Center for Neighborhood Technology (CNT) conservatively projects that the 
ART will stimulate the redevelopment of 80% of the vacant or severely under-utilized real estate parcels 
within a 5/8 mile radius of its Central Avenue route. In this projection CNT anticipates that the type of 
uses to which these properties will be redeveloped will mirror current land use in the same station 
areas. CNT also expects and that the level of intensity to which these properties will be redeveloped will 
correspond to the middle range of intensity for fixed guideway transit station areas with these types of 
land use, per data on hundreds of station areas analyzed by the Center for Transit Oriented 
Development. These projected developments could occur over period as brief as 10 or as long as 20 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-4 
 
years, depending largely on local government decisions regarding the implementation of the ART. The 
results of these projections are summarized on the following table.  
 
                  Summary of Projected New Development Linked to Implementation of the ART  
Station Areas 
Assessed Value 
Residents 
Residential 
Units 
Office 
Jobs  
Retail 
Jobs 
Development Value 
Downtown  
 $        197,359,099  
           
2,169  
            
1,146  
     
5,108  
       
1,664  
 $                917,219,750  
Urban 
Neighborhoods 
 $          54,870,890  
           
3,003  
            
1,444  
        
573  
   502  
 $                331,424,286  
Town Center  
 $        166,421,934  
         
12,263  
            
4,690  
        
432  
       
1,313  
 $             1,683,798,595  
Total 
 $        418,646,923  
         
17,435  
            
7,280  
     
6,113  
       
3,479  
 $             2,932,442,631  
 
According to data from the Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP), the projected 
value of development to be stimulated by the ART is in the midrange of development linked to similar 
new transit systems, including BRT, in comparable cities. It is less than the developments triggered by 
new transit in Cleveland, Kansas City, and Portland; larger than the transit corridor developments built 
to date in Las Vegas, Pittsburg, and Charlotte; about the same as developments launched in Seattle and 
Phoenix.  
 
CNT’s projections may also be compared to estimates of development to be spurred by the ART at 64 
locations in the middle of the Central Avenue corridor (Downtown and some Urban Neighborhood 
station areas) that were presented by members of the Albuquerque chapter of the National Association 
of Industrial and Office Properties (NAIOP) in 2014. CNT’s estimates of overall development value, which 
considered entire station areas rather than just selected sites, where approximately 20% higher than 
those of the NAIOP members for the same portions of the ART corridor. CNT also projected higher levels 
of commercial development and job creation and lower levels of residential development than the 
NAIOP estimates. While CNT’s projections are more reflective of the most recent data on station area 
development, NAIOP members’ projections of higher levels of downtown housing are in line with 
emerging trends that may not yet be evident in data on the built environments of station areas.     
 
Two observations on the development that may be anticipated in the ART corridor drive CNT’s 
recommendations related to public policy for the implementation of this transit system:  
• 
First, while the scale of development projected for the ART corridor is substantial, it amounts to less 
than 30% of the station area development that the Middle Region Council of Governments (MRCOG) 
has projected is necessary to realize the Preferred Scenario of the Albuquerque Region’s Long Range 
Transportation Plan – the scenario that will relieve traffic congestion, improve air quality, and 
provide the basis for a growing economy in this metropolitan area.   
• 
Second, the characteristics of the proposed ART that make high estimates of its development 
potential appropriate – its technical and service features, the economic vitality of its route, and its 
synergy with a range of critical development initiatives -- are interdependent.  The high quality of 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-5 
 
transit service offered by the ART is necessary to create a significant asset on Central Avenue. At this 
time, deploying such a large transit investment on any other Albuquerque route or a mere portion 
of Central Avenue would amount to ignoring the region’s principal development assets. The well-
documented relationship between quality transit service and an urban environment that attracts 
the workers and firms of a knowledge-based economy makes public support for the ART and 
initiatives such as Innovate ABQ and expansion of the University of New Mexico two sides of a coin.  
 
Accordingly, CNT offers the following recommendations for implementation of the ART:  
 
Protect the integrity of the ART plan and implement the full service as proposed:  In the event that full 
funding of the ART would not be secured by a pending federal Small Starts grant and local funds now 
committed as a match, additional funds should be sought through other federal grant programs and 
local sources. If necessary, prudent borrowing through federal programs that are readily available during 
2016 should be used. Any substantial cuts in operating capacity, service, or route would undermine the 
connectivity or reliability of the ART and diminish its potential value. The most important step that 
Albuquerque can make to encourage large and early private investment linked to the ART is to operate 
the fully conceived system from its inception and so convince the market that this system’s potential 
long-term value will be realized.  
 
Accelerate Development of the Second ART Line and Ancillary Services: The envisioned second ART line, 
which will link the Albuquerque International Sunport and a large section of the city to Downtown and 
the University of New Mexico, should be implemented with all possible speed. The value of a transit 
system depends to a large degree in its connectivity. To the extent that the ART offers access to more 
destinations it will be more widely used and the value of properties with access to it will grow. For the 
same reason connections from ART stations via conventional bus service or shuttle services to major 
retail or commercial centers should be studied and optimized whenever possible. Possible funding 
mechanisms for such service may be Transportation Management Associations (TMAs) – associations of 
employers that contribute financially to services that benefit their workers and enlarge their job or 
customer pool.   
 
Prioritize Economic Development Initiatives and Programs Inter-related with the ART: The first of these 
initiatives should be completion of Albuquerque’s Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) process so 
that it establishes by right zoning that permits construction at the level of density appropriate to 
Downtown, Urban Neighborhood, or Town Center transit station areas, accompanied by building 
standards and public investments that create pedestrian-friendly environments in transit-served 
neighborhoods. Economic development programs should focus on coordinating tax incentives, low-
interest financing, small scale infrastructure investments, workforce training, and other enterprise 
support programs to ensure the development of ART station areas. Public agencies should also prepare 
workforce housing  and worker training programs that will enable residents in a broad range of income 
levels to enjoy the benefits of development as property values in the ART corridor rise.  
 
 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-6 
 
I.  Albuquerque’s Need and Opportunity for Transit-Oriented Development 
 
A. Coordinating Land Use and Transportation  
 
Over the past fifteen years, the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area (AMPA) experienced rapid growth and 
land use patterns changed substantially as a result. The region spread outwards into the desert with the 
large majority of the growth in housing over this period occurring in Sandoval and Valencia Counties. 
During the housing bubble, this trend accelerated and led to the rapid construction of single-family 
housing on the outer edges of those counties. This land development pattern drove substantial 
increases in pollution, congestion and infrastructure maintenance costs. It has also resulted in a 
considerable mismatch between the location of housing and the location of employment in the AMPA 
region, which increases commute times, exacerbates congestion and decreases economic opportunity. 
In its most recent Long Range Transportation Plan, 2040 Futures, the Mid-Region Council of 
Governments (MRCOG) emphasizes many proposals that will link land use and transportation planning 
in order to mitigate these problems, change development patterns and position the AMPA to capitalize 
on its assets as the region grows in the coming decades. A basic strategy of this plan is the expansion 
and improvement of the public transit system and the concentration of future real estate development 
along transit corridors. The construction of a Bus Rapid Transit line on Central Avenue, named the 
Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART), is a key component of this strategy.  
As the 2040 Futures plan explains, residential and employment location patterns contribute to the 
increasing congestion at the bridges in the AMPA region. While most recent housing growth has 
occurred west of the Rio Grande, the majority of jobs continue to be located east of the river. This has 
led to severe congestion at the bridges as workers who live west of the river travel east to their jobs. 
This jobs-housing imbalance is depicted in Table 1 below wherein “ratios [of jobs to housing units] above 
one are considered a healthy balance, and it is generally assumed that a higher jobs-housing ratio 
equates to more opportunities to live close to work and shop close to home, thereby enabling shorter 
driving distances.”1   
 
Table I.1: Jobs-Housing Ratio 
 
                                                          
1 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. 2-10.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-7 
 
Source: Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. 2-10, Table 2-3. 
 
Though the jobs-housing ratio is substantially better east of the river, it too has worsened considerably 
since 2000. The net result of changes over the past ten years has created a situation in which, if current 
trends continue, the AMPA region will experience continually increasing congestion, especially  at the 
bridges that cross the Rio Grande.  
 
MRCOG periodically measures congestion in corridors throughout the AMPA and publishes a list of the 
30 most congested corridors in the region. While Central Avenue was ranked 20th in 2008 and 2010, the 
corridor was the 12th most congested in the region in 2012 .2 This is especially problematic due to the 
large job centers and major employers located in the corridor. 
 
One cause of this congestion is the overreliance on single-occupancy vehicle commuting throughout the 
region. MRCOG examined local travel behavior in a recent report, “Commuting Characteristics in the 
Albuquerque Metropolitan Area: An Analysis of Changing Travel Behavior, 2006-2013.” This study found 
that despite decreases in per capita vehicle miles traveled and a considerable increase in transit 
ridership, single-occupancy vehicle use is actually increasing throughout the region. As a result, “the 
Albuquerque [Metropolitan Statistical Area] MSA stands above the national average overall in total auto 
commuting mostly due to the high rate of commuters driving alone.”3 If alternatives to single-occupancy 
vehicle travel are not provided, this problem will only increase as the population grows.  
 
Though MRCOG revised its population projections for 2035 downwards from its projections in 2010 by 
15%, the MPO still predicts that the region will grow by nearly half a million people by 2040. MRCOG 
predicts that this will have a dramatic impact on travel demand and congestion with a 51% increase in 
daily vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and an increase of 94% in Rio Grande river crossings.4  
 
No new bridges are planned for the region, so the MRCOG must find alternate methods to relieve 
congestion. These include increasing employment west of the river and increasing housing east of the 
river. Another method is to increase and improve transit service that crosses the Rio Grande in order to 
decrease the number of cars using the bridges. This strategy is outlined in the Long Range 
Transportation Plan, in which the MPO proposes the establishment of a Priority Transit Network that 
would provide a convenient means for 20% of trips over the Rio Grande to be taken by transit by 2040. 
Beginning in 2016, 25% of sub-allocated federal transportation funding will be spent on transit in order 
to achieve this goal.5  
 
In preparing its 2040 Long Range Transportation Plan, the MRCOG created multiple scenarios. The Trend 
                                                          
2 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “A Profile in Congestion: The 30 Most Congested Corridors in the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area” Oct. 
2013, p. 26.    
3 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “Commuting Characteristics in the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area: An Analysis of Changing Travel 
Behavior, 2006-2013.” Sep. 2015, p. 3. 
4 Mid-Region Council of Governments PowerPoint Presentation, “2040 Population Projections…and their Implications for the 2040 Metropolitan 
Transportation Plan,” p. 18.  
http://www.mrcog-nm.gov/images/stories/pdf/transportation/CMP/CMP_2040PopulationProjections.pdf. Accessed on December 28, 2015. 
5 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, Appendix K. 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-8 
 
Scenario explores what would happen if there are no major changes to transportation infrastructure or 
land use patterns in the region. The Preferred Scenario envisions a different future in which major 
investments are made in transportation infrastructure with the result of increasing the levels of new 
construction, employment , and residential density in transit corridors. As the LRTP states, “In many 
respects, transit is an organizing principle for the Preferred Scenario: not only are transit nodes 
emphasized for additional development, but services are enhanced to provide meaningful connections 
across the metropolitan area and improve travelers’ ability to reach their destinations without relying 
exclusively on private vehicles.”6 Table 2 demonstrates the dramatic effects that improving transit 
service and prioritizing development in transit corridors is projected to have on the region.  
Table I.2: 2012-2040 Growth Rates for Select Performance Measures: Trend and Preferred Scenarios  
 
Source: Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. 1-13, Table EX-3. 
 
In addition to congestion, the sprawling development of land and increased single-occupancy vehicle 
travel in recent years has contributed to further substantial problems, such as increased water usage, 
the rising costs of infrastructure maintenance, declining air quality due to CO2 emissions and heightened 
risk of forest fires. As MRCOG explains and Table 2 shows, however, the Preferred Scenario 
“demonstrates that a long-range vision for growth can have a variety of benefits, including better 
transportation conditions, fewer investments in new infrastructure, and improved air quality and 
reduced emissions…”7  
 
The ART system will not only aid in the reduction of congestion along Central Avenue, but will also help 
contribute to economic development throughout the corridor. In 2013, TRIP, a national transportation 
research group, ranked the Central Avenue Bus Rapid Transit project number 7 on its list of the “Top 50 
                                                          
6 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. ex-4.  
7 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. 168. 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-9 
 
Transportation Projects to Support Economic Growth and Quality of Life in New Mexico.” The authors of 
this report described the ART as a vital “connector of transit destinations … that would assist in 
redevelopment of the vacant or underused land” in the corridor.8 
 
B. Economic Growth and Changing Preferences  
 
According to analysis by the Bureau of Business and Economic Research (BBER) at the University of New 
Mexico, New Mexico’s economy has lagged behind the economies of neighboring states in the 
Southwest in recent years.9 Even more worrisome, Director of the BBER Jeffrey Mitchell notes, is that 
“Albuquerque isn't even keeping pace with the slow growth in the rest of New Mexico. Albuquerque is 
trailing the state. From what we see, Albuquerque is continually losing jobs while competing cities are 
doing very well.”10 Of particular concern is the continued loss of business and professional employment, 
which includes white-collar jobs such as attorneys, accountants, architects, engineers and computer 
technicians. Mitchell calls this sector a “bellwether of where we’re going,” since, as he explains, this 
sector is “leading the national rebound in jobs,” but it has declined continuously in the AMPA since 
2010.11 This decline may be surprising because Albuquerque has led New Mexico in job growth in past 
decades and because the region includes institutions that specialize in research and development 
including the University of New Mexico (UNM), UNM’s hospital system, and a base of technology 
companies. One for reason for this relative decline may lie in the changing preferences of millennial and 
knowledge workers and the companies that employ them.  
As the Urban Land Institute notes in its 2015 survey of opinions about housing and transportation, over 
half of Americans “would like to live in a place where they do not need to use a car very often,” and this 
attitude is especially prevalent among millennials (63%).12 There is already an organization of local 
millennials, MiABQ, advocating for increased transit and the land use changes that transit can enable, 
such as walkable environments.13 Over 70% of millennials plan to move within the next 5 years and in 
order for Albuquerque to attract and retain these young workers, it will need to provide housing options 
that are in line with their preferences, which differ from most of the existing housing stock in the region. 
Millennial workers will power the economy for generations so attracting them to Albuquerque now, 
before they have settled down with families, is an urgent priority, which the ART can go a long way 
towards fulfilling. Additionally, as Baby Boomers grow older, providing housing options near high-quality 
transit will become increasingly desirable, as it will serve to both enhance their quality of life by 
                                                          
8 TRIP: The Road Information Program, “Top 50 Transportation Projects to Support Economic Growth and Quality of Life in New Mexico,” Aug. 
2013, p. 9. http://www.tripnet.org/docs/NM_TRIP_Economic_Development_Report_Aug_2013.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.  
9 Mitchell, Jeffrey, “New Mexico’s Economy: Recent Developments and Outlook,” Bureau of Business and Economic Research, Jan. 2015. 
https://bber.unm.edu/presentations/BBER-EconOutlook2015.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.  
10 Mayfield, Dan, “NM economic expert: 'While the nation has been growing, we've gone sideways’,” Albuquerque Business First, Jan. 2015. 
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/news/2015/01/15/nm-economic-research-expert-while-the-nation-has.html. Accessed on Oct. 15, 
2015.  
11 Metcalf, Richard, “Job growth positive but slow in NM,” Albuquerque Journal, Jan. 16, 2015.  
http://www.abqjournal.com/527145/news/job-growth-positive-but-slow-in-nm.html. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.   
12 Urban Land Institute, “America in 2015: A ULI Survey of Views on Housing, Transportation, and Community,” June 2015, p. 25. 
http://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ULI-Documents/America-in-2015.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.   
13 MiABQ Millennials Project, “Recommendations for Downtown Revitalization,” April 20, 2015. 
http://www.miabq.com/uploads/files/MiABQ%20Round%202%20Recommendations%20-%20April%202015.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.   


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-10 
 
maintaining their mobility, while also allowing local businesses to capture their discretionary spending.14  
If the full development potential of the ART and other transit investments is realized in Albuquerque and 
the AMPA, this growth will not decrease the supply of single-family housing or transform the 
predominantly car-oriented culture of Albuquerque. The large majority of the region’s residents will 
continue to use the car as their primary mode of transportation. The ART will, however, offer another 
travel option, which will foster greater diversity in the types of neighborhoods and lifestyles that the 
city’s transportation infrastructure is able to support.  
 
C. Capitalizing on Assets, Realizing Plans  
 
Many efforts to increase economic development along the Central Avenue Corridor are already 
underway or in the planning stage, including the expansion of the UNM Hospital and campus, ABQ the 
Plan,15 Innovate ABQ,16 STC.UNM (UNM technology transfer non-profit organization),17 the Downtown 
ABQ Mainstreet Initiative18 and the Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan.19 As part of ABQ Ride’s 
application for federal Small Starts funding to build the ART, the transit agency listed 17 significant 
multifamily or mixed use projects, representative of the types of development that the ART will foster, 
that have been built in recent years, and another 12 projects that are proposed in the Central Street 
corridor.20  The ART is a prominent feature of these plans and projects can serve as the “spine” of 
redevelopment efforts, according to Albuquerque’s Mayor Richard Berry.21 Technology and start-up 
companies are currently dispersed throughout the region without any particular geographic proximity to 
each other, which serves to blunt the intense innovation and job creation that can occur when these 
types of companies and institutions are located in a dense area, such as in Silicon Valley or the Boston 
region.22 Innovate ABQ seeks to concentrate many of these companies into a cluster called Innovation 
Central in Downtown Albuquerque and thereby “…create an environment with improved innovation-
based employment opportunities that will help attract a new generation of high-caliber students, 
faculty, researchers, innovators, and entrepreneurs” to the region.23  
 
                                                          
14 Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies, “Housing America’s Older Adults – Meeting the Needs of an Aging Population,” 2014. 
http://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/jchs.harvard.edu/files/jchs-housing_americas_older_adults_2014-ch7-references.pdf Accessed on Jan. 4, 
2015.  
15 City of Albuquerque, “ABQ the Plan: Investing in the future of Albuquerque,” June 2014.  https://www.cabq.gov/mayor/priorities-and-
initiatives/initiatives/abq-the-plan. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015 
16 Innovate ABQ. http://innovateabq.com. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015.  
17 STC.UNM, https://stc.unm.edu/_files/150310-ABQ-EDF-Presentation.pdf. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015. 
18 Downtown ABQ Mainstreet Initiative, http://www.abqmainstreet.org. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015. 
19 City of Albuquerque, “Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan” June 2014. 
https://www.cabq.gov/planning/documents/copy_of_Downtown2025_Dec14r.pdf. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015. 
20 ABQ Ride, Supplemental Land Use and Economic Development Information and Supporting Documentation Templates for Small Starts 
Projects, Draft Submittal for the City of Albuquerque, Albuquerque Rapid Transit Project, July 2, 2015   
21 Metcalf, Richard, “Revitalizing ABQ’s ‘spine’,” Albuquerque Journal, Oct. 12, 2015. http://www.abqjournal.com/658300. Accessed on Nov. 30, 
2015.  
22 Innovate ABQ PowerPoint Presentation to New Mexico Legislative Finance Committee, June 24, 2015.  
http://www.nmlegis.gov/lcs/handouts/ALFC%20062415%20Item%204%20LFC%20Innovate%20ABQ%20150624.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.  
And the Brooking Institution’s discussion of Innovation Centers http://www.brookings.edu/about/programs/metro/innovation-districts  
23 Innovate ABQ, “Innovate ABQ Development Framework,” April 15, 1015. http://innovateabq.com/developmentframework/. Accessed on Oct. 
15, 2015.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-11 
 
This initiative will help to reverse the trend of declining employment in the business and professional 
services, which BBER Director Mitchell sees as essential to improving Albuquerque’s economy. The 
designation of Central Avenue as Innovation Corridor is a fundamental part of the plan and the ART will 
play a vital role in making the city desirable for the workers that Innovate ABQ seeks to attract to the 
region.  Many local business leaders have already determined that this effort has tremendous potential 
and is important for the city’s future. As several prominent developers have noted, Innovate ABQ and 
the potential BRT line are already propelling development to the corridor.24  
 
D. Integrating Redevelopment Efforts and Zoning  
 
1. Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas  
Land use and zoning regulations will also play an essential role in this transformative process. The City of 
Albuquerque’s Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency has established numerous Metropolitan 
Redevelopment Areas (MRA’s) in the Central Avenue Corridor. MRA’s are designed to aid the 
redevelopment of community areas in the city by using tax incentives and infrastructure improvements 
to encourage private sector development in blighted or underutilized areas. In particular, MRA’s are 
tools for promoting the “efficient allocation of public and private resources, concentrating on land uses 
for greater efficiency, stability, image, diversity and control.”25 
 
Nearly the entire ART corridor on Central Avenue falls within an existing MRA with the most recent 
being the Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan, which was established in 2013 and 
runs along Central Avenue from the Rio Grande River to the western edge of Downtown.26 MRAs also 
permit changes to the zoning code, within their areas, in order to incentivize desired types of 
development. 
 
                                                          
24 Guzman, Stephanie, “Rapid transit, Innovate ABQ drives redevelopment in Central corridor,” Albuquerque Business First, Sep. 18, 2015.  
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/print-edition/2015/09/18/rapid-transit-innovate-abq-drives-redevelopment-in.html Accessed on 
Oct. 15, 2015.  
Guzman, Stephanie, “Titan CEO answers the 'why now?' of new Central Avenue project near UNM,” Albuquerque Business First, Sep. 22, 2015. 
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/blog/real-estate/2015/09/titan-ceo-answers-the-why-now-of-new-central.html. Accessed on Oct. 
15, 2015. 
Scott, Damon, “Nob Hill’s Platinum aiming for young professionals,” Albuquerque Business First, June 11, 2014.  
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/news/2014/06/11/nob-hill-s-platinum-aiming-for-young-professionals.html. Accessed Oct. 15, 2015. 
25 City of Albuquerque, Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, https://www.cabq.gov/planning/metropolitan-redevelopment-agency. Accessed 
on December 28, 2015.  
26 City of Albuquerque, “Historic Central: Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan,” Dec. 2, 2013. 
https://www.cabq.gov/planning/documents/HistoricCentralMRAHCMRADec2013AsAdopted.pdf. Accessed December 21, 2015.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-12 
 
27 
 
2.   Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO)  
The City of Albuquerque and Bernalillo County are currently in the midst of a 2-year process to create an 
updated and consolidated zoning code. Both city officials and private developers feel that this is a 
necessary step to streamlining the real estate development process while protecting neighborhoods and 
encouraging growth. One of the most important features of this IDO will be the simplification and 
standardization of the zoning code throughout the city. As the initial report on the ABC-Z process 
explains, currently only 53% of the city is covered by “standard” zoning districts; “the remaining 47% is 
governed by SU or overlay districts.” 28The current state of zoning in the city stifles growth, as its 
complexity causes confusion and acts as a constraint on real estate development. With the adoption of 
new IDO, the city will seek to clarify the zoning code and thereby incentivize development, which will be 
concentrated in downtown areas and transit corridors.  Zoning measures suggested by the literature on 
BRT that should be considered in the IDO process include: density bonuses, higher Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR), street-facing orientation for buildings, specified setbacks, mixed-use and TOD, and pedestrian-
oriented design standards.29 
                                                          
27 Data Source: AGIS Division, Planning Department  City of Albuquerque: 
https://abqbrt.blob.core.windows.net/resources/FTASmallStarts/Economic%20Development/Attachment%20A_Metropolitan%20Redevelopm
ent%20Areas_opt.pdf 
28 Clarion Associates, LLC, “Albuquerque ABC-Z: Land Regulation Diagnosis, Best Practices, and Annotated Outline,” May 2015, p. 5. 
http://albuquerque.engagingplans.org/sites/albuquerque.engagingplans.org/files/pdf/Diagnosis-Best%20Practices-
Outline%20PUBLIC%20DRAFT.pdf. Accessed on December 21, 2015.  
29 Arthur C. Nelson & Joanna Ganning, “National Study of BRT Development Outcomes”, page 56, National Institute for Transportation and 
Communities (NITC), January 2015, http://www.lulu.com/shop/arthur-c-nelson/nitc-rr-650-national-study-of-brt-development-
outcomes/paperback/product-22468494.html?ppn=1   


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-13 
 
 
E. Early Albuquerque Market Developments  
 
Though transit is already popular along Central Avenue, accounting for 42% of total system ridership,30 
implementation of a full-service bus rapid transit line will allow the city to capitalize on recent 
demographic trends (including growing numbers of seniors and millennials’ preference for urban 
housing) to increase economic development along the corridor. Some of this transit-oriented 
development is occurring already in Downtown,31 Sawmill,32 EDO33 and Nob Hill.34 An analysis of 
economic development opportunities completed in 2011 for the city also found substantial potential for 
economic growth along Central Avenue west of the Rio Grande.35  
 
ART can contribute to and drive many of these investment decisions. When asked about his recent 
decision to develop a large property along the corridor, Titan CEO Ben Spencer explained that his 
decision was heavily influenced by plans for the ART, stating, "We're very supportive of ART. This project 
is not contingent upon the opening of ART. But we think the ART will be a tremendous benefit to this 
project and we think it will spur more development along the corridor."  
 
F. True Rapid Transit 
 
The Albuquerque transit system’s “Rapid Ride” program has increased the frequency of service along 
designated routes, including Central Avenue, and has triggered consistent increases in ridership in 
recent years. The ART will build on the success of Rapid Ride by introducing true bus rapid transit service 
with dedicated transit lanes, prioritized signaling at intersections, per-boarding ticketing, level boarding 
platforms and a service frequency of 7.5 to 15 minutes, depending on location in the corridor.36 These 
basic improvements in transit service are expected to result in a 15% improvement in travel time as well 
as a 20-25% improvement in on-time performance.37 As Dayna Crawford, deputy director of the city’s 
Transit Department, explains, “the Rapid Ride bus routes on Central are “often at capacity, delayed by 
                                                          
30 City of Albuquerque, “ABQ the Plan: Investing in the future of Albuquerque,” June 2014, p. 20. https://www.cabq.gov/mayor/priorities-and-
initiatives/initiatives/abq-the-plan. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015 
31 Scott, Damon, “A car-loving city hits the brakes,” Albuquerque Business First, April 11, 2015. http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/print-
edition/2014/04/11/a-car-loving-city-hits-the-brakes.html. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.  
32 Guzman, Stephanie, “Construction launches on Sawmill apartment complex,” Albuquerque Business Journal, Oct. 6, 2015.  
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/blog/real-estate/2015/10/construction-launches-on-sawmill-apartment-complex.html. Accessed 
Oct. 15, 2015.  
33 Guzman, Stephanie, “Titan CEO answers the 'why now?' of new Central Avenue project near UNM,” Sep. 22, 2015.  
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/blog/real-estate/2015/09/titan-ceo-answers-the-why-now-of-new-central.html. Accessed Oct. 15, 
2015. 
34 Guzman, Stephanie, “Apartment projects continue to emerge in East Nob Hill,” Oct. 12, 2015. 
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/blog/real-estate/2015/10/apartment-projects-continue-to-emerge-in-east-nob.html?iana=ind_cre. 
Accessed Oct. 15, 2015. 
35 Gibbs Planning Group, Inc., “Retail Market Analysis: West Central District, Albuquerque, NM,” Jan. 2011. 
https://www.cabq.gov/planning/documents/WestRte66RetailMarketAnalysis0311.pdf. Accessed Dec. 22, 2015 
36 MRCOG, “White Paper – Regional Accessibility Benefits Associated with Implementation of the Albuquerque Rapid Transit on Central 
Avenue”, December 2015 
37 City of Albuquerque, “ART Fact Sheet,” November 2015. https://www.cabq.gov/transit/documents/art-landscape-handout-november-
2015.pdf. Accessed December 28, 2015.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-14 
 
traffic” and, as a result, suffer from poor reliability of service.38 In addition to improved service levels 
and increased transit speeds, the permanent physical infrastructure and street design of the ART would 
also play an essential role in attracting and expanding economic development in the corridor. In many 
ways, however, it is the increased accessibility that improved transit service will provide to Albuquerque 
residents that will lead to the greatest gains in economic development.  
 
Increasing accessibility is one of the most significant ways that public transit promotes economic 
development. Improved accessibility is vital to regional economic growth as it provides increased 
regional efficiency, while strengthening linkages between workers and employment. A study by 
Professor Joseph Berechman showed that from the worker’s perspective, “improved accessibility has a 
positive impact on economic development in terms of changes in employment and earnings.”39 
Accessibility can also play an important role in improving the economic prospects of low-income and 
transit dependent citizens. As Professor Todd Litman explains, “improving affordable, accessibility 
options directly benefits disadvantaged people, improves their access to education and employment, 
and therefore their productivity… and improves their ability to access medical services and healthy food, 
which reduces healthcare costs.”40 
 
Beyond improving economic outcomes for individuals and households, accessibility can play an 
important role in regional economic development by linking job centers and workers, especially when 
transit is connected to economic clusters. As Robert Puentes notes, “improving transportation 
connections to jobs enhances the efficiency of labor markets for both workers and employers. A high 
quality public transit network can allow employers to benefit from the clustering and agglomeration of 
people and businesses, and thereby raise productivity in metro areas.”41 
 
The recent MRCOG whitepaper noted earlier measured the number of residents and jobs that could be 
reached within 45 minutes using the level of accessibility available through the ART. The results, as 
depicted in Table 3, demonstrate that the ART would improve accessibility substantially for residents 
throughout the city, as compared to the current regular and Rapid Ride bus service.42  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
38 Westphal, D’val, “The pros and cons of ABQ bus rapid transit,” Albuquerque Journal, Sep. 18, 2015.  
http://www.abqjournal.com/646078/news/the-pros-and-cons-of-albuquerques-proposed-bus-rapid-transit-on-central.html. Accessed Dec. 22, 
2015. 
39 Ozbay, k., Ozmen-Ertekin, Berechman,J., “Empirical Analysis of Relationship between Accessibility and Economic Development,” Journal of 
Urban Planning and Development, 1 June 2003, p. 13. 
40 Litman, p. 9. 
41 Puentes, et. al., “Missed Opportunity: Transit and Jobs in Metropolitan America,” Brookings Institution, May 2011, p. 3. 
  42 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “White Paper – Regional Accessibility Benefits Associated With Implementation of the Albuquerque 
Rapid Transit on Central Ave,” December 2015.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-15 
 
Table I.3: Jobs and Residents Accessible Within 45 Minutes: Before and After ART Implementation 
 
Source: Mid-Region Council of Governments, “White Paper – Regional Accessibility Benefits Associated With Implementation of 
the Albuquerque Rapid Transit on Central Ave,” December 2015, Table 1, p. 5.  
 
Since the ART intersects with so many north-south bus lines, the accessibility improvements of this 
service will extend to many residents who do not live directly in the Central Avenue corridor. The 
benefits of this transit enhancement (including improvement in employment and earnings, travel time 
savings, and quality of life) will not be confined to residents and businesses in the corridor, but broadly 
shared by residents throughout the city.  As Puentes explains, these considerable accessibility 
improvements will also increase economic efficiency and influence business location decisions, which 
will likely lead to increased development along the Central Avenue corridor. 
 
G. Matching Comparable Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Projects in Other Cities 
 
1.  
   
 
 
BRT Investments in Comparable Cities   
BRT is a relatively new form of transportation in the US. CNT could identify only 12 examples of BRT in 
America for which research has been published in the professional literature. Of these systems, only the 
BRT lines of Pittsburg were in operation before 2005, and some of the types of data needed for a 
comprehensive analysis of BRT performance are only available through 2012. Moreover, these cases 
vary widely in terms of the physical elements of their BRT systems, the types of locations they connect, 
and the size and economic health of the cities in which they are located. Within these limitations several 
studies have examined the economic impacts of BRT in America to date and the results of this research 
are informative and encouraging  for the development of the ART.  
 
In its overview of BRT case studies throughout North America, the Institute for Transportation and 
Development Policy (ITDP) observes that, depending on local conditions, BRT can prompt levels of 
economic development that are equal to or greater than similar light rail or streetcar systems. 
Furthermore, since BRT systems are cheaper to build and operate, they can “leverage far more TOD 
investment per dollar of transit investment. ITDP analysts advocate for BRT as a means to “bring jobs, 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-16 
 
activity, and life back into their communities” and note the “success of BRT as a mobility option and as 
an economic development lever.”43 
 
A 2012 study by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) entitled “Bus Rapid Transit: Projects 
Improve Service and Can Contribute to Economic Development,” also supports this claim. The GAO 
determined that BRT has the ability to increase economic development. The study states that BRT can 
enhance economic development in a manner similar to rail transit when certain conditions are present, 
including physical BRT features that convey a sense of permanence to developers, major institutional 
employment and activity centers along or near the BRT corridor, and transit-supportive local policies 
and development incentives.” 44 Albuquerque’s planned ART possesses all of these attributes. The city’s 
largest employment centers lie along the proposed ART line, institutions such as the UNM and Innovate 
ABQ strongly support implementation of the ART, as do leaders of the regional development 
community, and Mayor Berry is a staunch proponent of the project. 
 
The ITDP prepared the following summary of investments made in transit corridors for BRT and 
comparable streetcar and light rail systems. It shows that a number of cities have seen substantial 
economic development investments along their BRT routes, during a brief period that included the 
worst recession in 80 years. These cases include Cleveland ($5.8b), Pittsburgh ($903m), Las Vegas 
($2.0b), Kansas City ($5.2b) and Eugene, Ore ($100m).45 In several of these cities the large scale of 
investment within a few years of the BRT’s opening indicates that significant projects were launched in 
anticipation of the transit service’s operation. It is important to note that these figures are based 
entirely of the value of developments built in BRT corridors. They do not reflect travel time savings, 
individual transportation expenditures, increased economic and labor market efficiency or increased 
earnings and employment due to improved accessibility, which, when quantified, constitute substantial 
benefits of improved transit service. 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
43 Hook, W., Lotshaw, S., and Weinstock, A., “More Development for your Transit Dollar: An Analysis of 21 North American Transit Corridors,” 
Institute for Transportation Policy and Development,” 2014, p. 152. 
44 U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Bus Rapid Transit: Projects Improve Service and Can Contribute to Economic Development,” July 
2012, p. 38. 
45 Hook, p. 95. 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-17 
 
Table I.4. Investments Linked to BRT Comparable Projects  
 
 
 
The ITDP has also summarized investments in transit corridors in relationship to the general economic 
condition of the region in which they are located. This summary shows that large development 
investments have been made along BRT routes in several cities where the economy was only fair or 
poor.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-18 
 
 
 
2.   Early Outcomes from BRT Investments in Comparable Cities   
A study sponsored by the National Institute for Transportation and Communities (NITC) and released in 
January 2016 has deepened our understanding of the economic impacts of BRT. NITC’s analyses are 
limited by the basic fact that, with one exception, BRT systems in the US have only been operating since 
2005 or later. When sufficient data is available, the NITC study rigorously compares levels of 
development achieved in BRT corridors with development that has occurred in control areas, which are 
similar to the BRT corridors but without rapid transit service. Comparisons are also made between 
development in BRT corridors and the general pace of development in the urban counties where BRT 
routes are located. NITC’s overall conclusions might be fairly summarized by saying that BRT has positive 
economic impacts, in so far as impacts can be determined from available data, but it is not a magic 
bullet for economic development. In northeastern cities that have been losing population and jobs for 
decades BRT has not reversed these trends in a few years, but population and job loss has usually been 
slowed in BRT corridors. In southwestern regions that have followed decentralized patterns of 
development for decades, BRT corridors have usually achieved positive growth, surpassing regional 
growth rates for some types of properties, but the general rate of growth is not yet faster than the pace 
of regional sprawl.46  While the NITC study continually qualifies its findings in light of data limitations, it 
reports a number of meaningful, specific analytical results.  
 
The NITC study analyzed new development patterns within BRT corridors between the periods 2000 
and 2007, before the Great Recession, and 2008 to 2015, covering the recession and recovery. This 
analysis found that BRT corridors increased their share of new office space in the counties where 
they are located by a third, from 11.4 percent to 15.2 percent. We also find that although new 
                                                          
46 Arthur C. Nelson & Joanna Ganning, “National Study of BRT Development Outcomes”, Executive Summary and Conclusions, National 
Institute for Transportation and Communities (NITC), January 2015, http://www.lulu.com/shop/arthur-c-nelson/nitc-rr-650-national-study-of-
brt-development-outcomes/paperback/product-22468494.html?ppn=1 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-19 
 
multifamily apartment construction within 0.50 mile of BRT was small, its share of multifamily 
housing in the county has more than doubled since 2008. NITC concluded that BRT corridors appear 
to be gaining market share for new offices and multifamily apartments.47  
 
Table I.6 Distribution of Office Development 2000-2007 and 2008-2015 
Metric 
BRT Metros 
2000-2007 
New Office Square Feet 
39,292,786 
<=0.50 mile Transit 
4,487,390 
BRT Corridor Share 
11.4% 
2007-2015 
New Office Square Feet 
13,682,472 
<=0.50 mile Transit 
2,081,209 
BRT Corridor Share 
15.2% 
Change in Share of New Office Development 
33.2% 
Note: Difference in share have z-scores resulting in p <0.01. 
<= means less than or equal to.48 
 
 
Table I.7 Distribution of Multifamily Apartment Development 2000-2007 and 2008-2015 
 
Metric 
BRT Metros 
2000-2007 
New MF Square Feet 
25,271,580 
<0.50 mile Transit 
546,325 
Share 
2.2% 
2007-2015 
New MF Square Feet 
6,746,189 
<0.50 mile Transit 
349,177 
Share 
5.2% 
Change in Share of New Multifamily Units 
139.4% 
 
Source49 
 
The NITC study notes that there is a large body of literature showing that office properties capitalize 
on the benefits of rail transit proximity to achieve higher rents and values. NITC found that in most 
metropolitan areas, BRT systems are associated with higher office rents per square foot within 0.50 
mile of BRT stations, apparently influencing non-residential property rents in ways similar to rail 
transit.50      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
47 Nelson, NITC, pages 30-32 
48 Ibid 
49 Ibid 
50 Nelson, NITC, pages 65-67 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-20 
 
Table I.8 Summary of BRT Corridor Location and Office Rents 
System 
Central County 
Downtown 
Outside Downtown 
Cleveland 
  
$2.44  
  
Eugene-Springfield 
  
$1.93  
  
Kansas City 
  
$2.67  
  
Las Vegas 
$4.81  
+ 
$4.85  
Pittsburgh 
$1.57  
+ 
$2.30  
Note: “+” means predicted direction of association but statistically insignificant coefficient51 
 
Another significant finding of the NITC study is that BRT corridors generally out performed areas 
that were comparable but lacked public transit (called “counter-factual” areas) in job growth. NITC 
compared job growth in BRT and counter-factual areas in the years leading to the great recession,  
through 2007, and in the in the first years of recovery from the recession, 2008-2011. In most 
regions job loss was greater in the BRT corridors through 2007 (years when most BRT systems were 
either not yet in operation or just beginning to function), but positive job growth in BRT corridors 
was significantly higher than in the control areas during the recession recovery years (when BRT 
systems were in operation).52  
 
Table I.9 Mean Block Group Shift-Share Summary of BRT Station Area and Counter-Factual Locations 
before Recession (2002/2004-2007) and during Recovery (2008-2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
Pre-Recession Shift-Share     Recovery Shift-Share  
BRT Line  
Counter-
Factual  
BRT  
Counter-
Factual  
BRT  
Pittsburgh South—1977 – Basic  
-14.4  
-62.9  
-10.0  
-108.8  
Pittsburgh East—1983 – Bronze  
49.4  
5.7  
-5.0  
34.1  
Pittsburgh West— 2000 – Basic  
-23.6  
-133.3  
-3.3  
86.4  
Las Vegas MAX—2004 - Unrated  
-140.8  
-203.5  
223.5  
-13.1  
Los Angeles Orange—2005 - Bronze  
5.8  
63.3  
-67.2  
-55.4  
Los Angeles Silver—2009 - Unrated  
29.4  
-137.8  
-32.9  
1,035.5  
Kansas City Main Street—2005 - Unrated  
6.8  
-9.6  
-47.6  
9.9  
Eugene-Springfield Emerald Express—2007 - Bronze  
-1.6  
5.0  
-6.5  
34.8  
Cleveland Health Line—2008 - Silver  
-17.1  
-24.4  
-45.8  
-29.1  
Bronx Pelham Parkway—2008 - Unrated  
-0.9  
-6.2  
-4.2  
40.8  
Phoenix Main Street—2008 - Unrated  
-10.5  
-44.2  
-20.3  
-72.9  
Salt Lake City MAX—2008 - Unrated  
-67.4  
-44.5  
-57.1  
95.0  
Positive Shift in Share  
4  
3  
1  
7  
Unweighted (summed) means*  
(214.3)  
(454.6)  
(43.5)  
21.8  
 
*Excludes Los Angeles Silver Line [considered an outlier because job growth was so high in this corridor] 
Note: Coefficients are the sum of the “industry share” of the shift in mean jobs per block group from shift-share analysis 
comparing change in share of total jobs between BRT station areas and counter-factual locations with respect to their central 
county over pre-recession (2002-2007; Phoenix is 2004-2007) and recovery (2008-2011) periods.53 
 
                                                          
51 Ibid  
52 Nelson, NITC, pages 52-4 
53 Ibid, page 53  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-21 
 
 
3.    
Similarities in BRT Research Findings  
In regard to several aspects of economic development, the NITC study reports that BRT systems 
with technical features of design and equipment which enable them to serve their customers with 
greater speed and reliability, appear to achieve stronger positive economic impacts than BRT 
services that lacked these characteristics. This observation agrees with findings of ITDP and GAO 
research that BRT systems with such features as dedicated lanes, signal priority, pre-boarding fare 
systems, and permanent stations, are likely to generate higher levels of ridership and related 
private investment. The NITC, ITDP, and GAO studies also agree that BRT systems are likely to 
succeed as transit services and as drivers of economic development to the extent that they:  
• 
Connect dense residential neighborhoods to centers of employment, vital services, and 
entertainment  
• 
Provide reliable accessibility to other transit services  
• 
Operate in conjunction with local government and civic initiatives that attract and 
incentivize private investment, in part by providing a zoning environment that will 
encourage dense development coupled with place-making initiatives.54 
 
This level of agreement in BRT research is positive news for Albuquerque and the ART in two 
respects. First, the proposed ART incorporates state-of-the-art technology, design and operating 
practices; it connects the primary centers of employment and services within the city to rapidly 
growing neighborhoods and other transportation services; it is an integral part of other progressive 
development initiatives within the city and region, including the preferred development scenario of 
MRCOG, Innovate ABQ, and a growth-oriented and comprehensive zoning reform program – all 
points that are discussed Sections I.A.-F. of this report. In short, the ART proposal incorporates 
those features that national experience indicates are elements of successful BRT operation and 
positive economic impact. Second, the characteristics of successful BRT operation and linked 
development are, to a large extent controllable. While risk is involved in achieving the objectives of 
any major infrastructure investment, Albuquerque can reduce these risks by fully executing its well-
conceived ART plans and continuing to refine its strategies in light of local experience and ongoing 
BRT research.   
 
 
                                                          
54 Nelson, NITC, “Implications for Planning and Development”, pages 116-7  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-22 
 
 
 
II. Comparative Analysis of Albuquerque’s Transit-Oriented Development 
Opportunity    
 
In an initial effort to quantify what the Central Avenue ART would mean to development in 
Albuquerque, members of the city’s chapter of the National Association of Industrial and Office Property 
Developers (NAIOP) projected the service’s development impacts on 12 station areas in the central 
portion of the corridor, including downtown and the other districts in the corridor that are now most 
intensively developed. In a presentation of their findings in January 2014, the NAIOP members 
estimated that the ART would stimulate the redevelopment of some 64 currently vacant acres, with a 
conservatively set floor-to-area ratio of 1.5, resulting in the creation of approximately 3,900 residential 
units; 3,300 office jobs; 2100 retail jobs, and $941 million in new investments.    
 
The Center for Neighborhood Technology (CNT) has projected the approximate value of development in 
the Central Avenue corridor -- along with changes in assessed value, employment and housing units -- 
given implementation of the ART. While CNT’s analysis supports the NAIOP members’ estimates, it is in 
some respects, broader, more nuanced, and directly based on data for achieved development in other 
transit station areas and corridors nationally. The following pages describe the basic logic, key 
assumptions, and results of CNT’s analysis.  
  
A. The Typology of Station Areas 
 
Transit-oriented developments (TODs) are not restricted to the urban core and can occur in 
neighborhoods outside of the downtown. In essence, TOD outside of downtown areas will have the 
essential characteristics of convenient pedestrian access to transit, an integrated mix of land uses, and 
higher density of residents and\or jobs than comparable areas that are not transit served.  However, the 
intensity of development will be lower areas outside of the central business district. Using TOD Typology 
defined in the book New Transit Town: Best Practices in TOD, the 25 planned ART stations are classified 
as one of three TOD station types: Downtown, Urban Neighborhood and Town Center.   
 
Downtowns are high-density neighborhoods with neighborhood serving amenities. They provide access 
to several types of transit, can act as transfer points and attract residents who seek a 24-hour location 
with a variety of cultural amenities. In many cases they are one of the employment centers of the city.  
Urban Neighborhoods are defined as historic neighborhoods that surround the downtown and that 
often are extensions of the downtown street grid and were historically served by streetcar or heavy rail. 
These livable, vibrant neighborhoods today are home to moderate to high density housing with main 
street shopping and civic amenities integrated into the neighborhoods. The urban form supports heavy 
pedestrian activity and can form a transit corridor for bus rapid or light rail transit. 
 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-23 
 
Town Centers are emerging neighborhoods with demand for high quality shopping and transit 
connections to the urban downtown. These regions provide opportunities for dense land uses around 
transit stations that scale down within a half-mile from the stations; multifamily residential buildings 
give way to single family detached homes as you move away from the station. Town Centers typically 
support neighborhood retail along the main street. The following chart summarizes CNT’s grouping of 
the ART station areas into these three categories.  
 
Downtown 
Urban Neighborhood 
Town Center 
1st Street @ Central (across from A.T.C.) 
16th Street 
Atrisco Drive 
1st Street @ Central (in front of A.T.C.) 
Bryn Mawr Drive 
BioPark 
Cedar Street  
Cornell Drive 
Coors Boulevard 
Copper Avenue @ 2nd 
Rio Grande Boulevard 
Eubank Boulevard 
Copper Avenue @ 6th 
San Mateo Boulevard 
Juan Tabo Boulevard 
Gold Avenue @ 6th 
Solano Drive 
Louisiana Boulevard 
University Boulevard 
Washington Street 
Old Coors Drive 
Walter Street 
  
Tramway Boulevard 
  
  
Unser Boulevard 
  
  
Wyoming Boulevard 
 
 
 
 
B. Key Comparisons and Assumptions 
 
Buffers and Assessed Values 
For analytical purposes, the 25 ART stations were grouped into three districts that corresponded to their 
typologies, and a 5/8 mile buffer was created around each of the districts. The 5/8 mile buffer 
corresponds to a half mile walking distance around each station through developed or developable land 
plus allowance for street widths.  Buffers were created for the districts rather than individual station 
areas to avoid double counting those areas within the half mile walking distance of more than one 
station. The three district buffers were overlaid on the Bernalillo County Assessor’s 2015 parcel data and 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-24 
 
the proportional weighted average of assessed value per acre for Commercial, Residential and Vacant 
parcels was calculated.  
 
  
Downtown 
Urban 
Neighborhood 
Town Center 
Commercial Wt. Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$1,463,309 
$756,535 
$431,161 
Residential Wt. Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$1,021,919 
$1,014,705 
$603,376 
Vacant Wt. Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$331,008 
$215,291 
$146,415 
Under-utilized Properties- Commercial Wt. 
Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$410,590 
$273,990 
$198,364 
Under-utilized Properties - Residential Wt. 
Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$157,926 
$175,200 
$100,294 
 
The percentage increase in total assessed values between 2006 & 2015 was calculated for each of the 
three districts and it was assumed that the developed parcels will have the same percentage increase in 
assessed values.  
 
Downtown 
Urban Neighborhood 
Town Center 
Total Assessed Value - 2006 
$1,312,409,823 
$1,577,824,088 
$1,931,696,215 
Total Assessed Value - 2015 
$1,592,921,256 
$2,061,918,052 
$2,362,678,117 
Percent change (2006-2015) 
21.4% 
30.7% 
22.3% 
 
 
 
Vacancy and Under-Utilized Properties 
The number of vacant acres in the 5/8 mile buffer for each of the three districts was calculated using 
vacancy of parcels as indicated in the property class column of Assessor’s data. Overlapping parcels 
were assigned to the denser district (in order of higher density: Downtown, Urban Neighborhood, and 
Town Center). Vacant parcels that were in the following land uses were subtracted: drainage/flood, 
parks/recreation, transportation/utilities and public/institutional. 
  
Under-utilized properties are defined as the parcels in which the land value is greater that the building 
improvements. Parcels with “Commercial or Residential” property class having building improvement 
values less than three-fourths of the land value were extracted (to eliminate overlaps and over-
estimation) as well as parcels with following land uses: drainage/flood, parks/recreation, 
transportation/utilities and public/institutional. Parcels with surface parking lots were identified and half 
were removed from the under-utilized properties category since parking requirements will still need to 
be fulfilled with a mix of parking structures and surface lots. After these considerations were made,  
intuitive estimates were made of the percentages of the remaining  vacant and under-utilized land that 
would be developed, allowing for the possibility that many of these parcels might not be buildable for 
unique reasons. 
 
Downtown 
Urban 
Town Center 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-25 
 
Neighborhood 
Percent vacant land developed 
80% 
80% 
50% 
Percent under-utilized properties developed 
80% 
50% 
33% 
 
TOD Typology/Land Use Mix 
Land use mix in different TOD areas are derived from the Normative Metrics presented in the Center for 
Transit-oriented Development’s (CTOD) Performance-Based Transit-Oriented Development Typology 
Guidebook55.  On the basis of comparing data from hundreds of transit station areas, the Guidebook 
categorizes station areas into three place types: Employment Places, Balanced Places and Residential 
Places. This categorization broadly corresponds to the station area typologies of New Transit Town:  
Downtown:  
Employment Places – Downtown Urban Neighborhood   
Balanced Places – Urban Neighborhood  
Residential Places – Town Center 
 
The Guidebook makes a further differentiation of five levels of intensity of development within each of 
the three broad TOD typologies. For each level, the Guidebook has calculated average numbers of 
workers, residents, and households per acre. The level of intensity is inversely proportional to the 
vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per station area resident. In other words, the lower the average VMT per 
station area resident, the higher is the number of workers, residents, and households per acre. We can 
simplify this finding by expressing it in terms of a five-point scale:  
 
1 – high VMT, low density  
 
2 – high-moderate VMT, low-moderate density  
 
3 – moderate VMT, moderate density  
 
4 – low-moderate VMT, high-moderate density  
 
5 – low VMT, high density  
 
Examining census data for the ART station areas, CNT found that the current densities of its Downtown 
and Urban Neighborhood station areas are roughly a 3.5 on our 5-point scale, while the Town Center 
station areas are about a 2.5 on the 5-point scale. This finding indicates that the densities of the Center 
Avenue Corridor’s  Downtown and Urban Neighborhood station areas are now sufficient to support 
rapid transit, but could be developed more intensively, while the corridor’s Town Centers need some 
further development to reach average densities for US transit station areas.        
Downtown: Employment Places – ART, Average of Low & Low-Mod VMT, 3.5 
Urban Neighborhood: Balanced Places – ART, Average of Low & Low-Mod VMT, 3.5 
Town Center: Residential Places – ART, Average of Low-Mod & Mod VMT, 2.5  
 
                                                          
55 CNT was one of the three founding members of CTOD and the metrics formulated for TOD typology are derived 
from an analysis of approximately 3,760 existing train station areas across 39 regions of the nation. The typologies 
are conservative estimates derived by taking the average values observed in the station areas from the U.S. Census 
and CNT’s Housing and Transportation (H+T®) Affordability Index. 
http://ctod.org/pdfs/2010PerformanceBasedTODTypologyGuidebook.pdf 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-26 
 
Actual average numbers for the Guidebook station area levels and the averages which correspond to 
typical ART station areas are provided in the following table.   
 
 
 
 
  
Downtown - Employment 
Place 
Urban Neighborhood - 
Balanced Place 
Town Center - Residential 
Place 
  
Low-
Mod 
VMT 
Low VMT 
Average 
Low-
Mod 
VMT 
Low 
VMT 
Average 
Mod 
VMT 
Low-
Mod 
VMT 
Average 
Residents 
   
5,103  
   
12,581  
   
8,842  
   
10,732  
   
29,875  
   
20,304  
   
10,229  
   
20,106  
   
15,168  
Workers 
   
29,811  
   
96,725  
   
63,268  
   
11,031  
   
34,280  
   
22,656  
   
2,351  
   
4,612  
   
3,482  
Total 
Intensity 
(workers+resi
dents) 
   
34,914  
   
109,306  
   
72,110  
   
21,763  
   
64,155  
   
42,959  
   
12,580  
24,718 
   
18,649  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Households 
   
2,524  
   
6,828  
   
4,676  
   
4,646  
   
15,466  
   
10,056  
   
3,906  
   
7,684  
   
5,795  
Household 
Size 
1.67 
1.58 
   
1.63  
2.21 
1.95 
   
2.08  
2.62 
   
2.61  
   
2.62  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Gross Density 
(Units/Acre) 
10.3 
28.5 
   
19.4  
16.4 
48.7 
   
32.6  
10.3 
21.6 
   
16.0  
Residential 
Density 
(Units/Acre) 
20.6 
51.4 
   
36.0  
20.9 
55.6 
   
38.3  
12.1 
23.6 
   
17.9  
Block Size 
(Acres) 
6.4 
3.7 
   
5.1  
5.8 
3.7 
   
4.8  
5.7 
4.1 
   
4.9  
 
 
Other figures of interest from the Guidebook data are indications of “Total Intensity” the sum of workers 
plus residents in a station area, and the ratio of workers to residents. CNT has made a broad assumption 
that in the vacant land to be redeveloped within the ART corridor, the ratios of land allotted to 
commercial and residential use will approximate the ratios of workers to residents in a station area. By 
applying these ratios to future residential and commercial land uses (vacant & under-utilized properties 
to be developed) we estimate the following percentages for the uses of newly developed land in ART 
station areas: 
Downtown 
Urban Neighborhood 
Town Center 
% Residential 
20%* 
47% 
81% 
% Commercial 
80%* 
53% 
19% 
* The percentages were tweaked to increase residential from 12% to 20% in keeping with the objective of making 
Albuquerque’s downtown into a 24-hour residential place.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-27 
 
 
Future commercial land uses were further split into office and retail. The proportion of these land uses 
in the future is assumed to be same as the current proportion which was calculated from Albuquerque’s 
current land use. 
 
Office to Retail ratio from current land use 
Downtown 
Urban Neighborhood 
Town Center 
            Office 
0.70 
0.30 
0.20 
            Retail 
0.30 
0.70 
0.80 
 
 
Floor Area Ratio 
Floor area ratios are assumed to be constant in the entire district for each type of development for 
calculation purposes. In reality, densities will be highest in developments surrounding the stations and 
gradually scale done towards the periphery of the 5/8 mile buffer. These estimates are based on the 
anticipated intensities of land development. Actual intensities will be determined by combinations of 
zoning allowances and market forces. CNT’s projections of FAR should be read as such estimates and not 
directly as recommendations for zoning. To the extent that these estimates are considered in 
Albuquerque’s Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) process, a useful question would be, “What 
FAR regulations applied to ART station areas would be conducive to achieving the levels of development 
projected in CNT’s analysis?”    
 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
Downtown 
Urban 
Neighborhood 
Town Center 
Residential 
2.0 
1.3 
0.8 
Commercial office 
2.0 
1.0 
0.5 
Retail  
2.0 
0.5 
0.5 
 
Building Construction 
Building construction costs were derived from the RS Means Building Costs Calculator for the year 2013 
for new construction in Albuquerque. The cost estimates are an average of costs for using Union Labor 
or Open shop.  
 
Downtown 
Cost per sq ft 
Residential (1-3 story building) 
$129.69 
Office (5-10 story building) 
$140.34 
Retail (3 story department store) 
$115.78 
 
Ten percent of the retail developments in the Urban Neighborhood & Town Center are assumed to be 
restaurants. The remaining retail will be a mix of big box and smaller retail stores.  
 
Urban Neighborhood & Town Center 
Cost per sq ft 
Residential (1-3 story building) 
$129.69 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-28 
 
Office (2-4 story building) 
$135.07 
Retail (1 story) - 90% of retail 
$103.31 
Restaurant(1 story) - 10% of retail 
$252.39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Calculations of Potential Development Scale  
 
1. Downtown District 
The downtown district’s eight stations and the 5/8 mile buffer area are seen in the below map. 
Currently, there are 23.2 acres of vacant land and 76.3 acres of under-utilized properties in this district, 
eighty percent of which will be developed in to a denser employment center. Complementary retail 
amenities and dense mixed-use residential uses support the vision of creating a 24-hour downtown.  
 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-29 
 
Downtown 
Ref 
No. 
  
Vacant Acres 
Underutilized 
Properties 
  
Calculation 
Assumptions 
Source 
  
  
A 
B 
  
  
  
  
1 
Downtown Buffer (acres) 
23.2 
76.3 
  
  
  
Assessor's Data 2015 
2 
80%/80% to be developed 
18.5 
61.0 
  
Line 1 * 0.8 
80% of vacant land and underutilized 
properties to be developed 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Residential 
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
Residential Share of 
development 
3.7 
12.2 
  
Line 2 * 0.2 
20% 
TOD Typology 
4 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
7.4 
24.4 
  
Line 3 *2.0 
2.0 floor area ratio 
  
5 
Total Acres 
31.8 
  
  
4A + 4B 
  
  
5 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land – Residential 
31.8 
  
  
Same as Line 5 
  
  
6 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land – Residential 
1,386,425 
  
  
Line 5 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
7 
Value of New Residential 
$31,817,939 
  
  
((Line 4A * 
690,911) + (Line 
4B *863,992)) * 
1.214 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre (vacant) = 
$690,911 (Difference between Residential & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre 
(underutilized) = $863,992 (Difference 
between Residential & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 21.4% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
8 
Number of Units 
1,146 
  
  
Line 5 * 36 
Residential Density (Units/Acre) = 36.0 
TOD Typology 
9 
Number of new residents 
2,169 
  
  
Line 8 * 1.89 
Average Household Size = 1.89 
ACS 2013 
10 
Value of new residential 
construction 
$179,805,417 
  
  
Line 6 * 129.7 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $129.7 
RS Means Estimation for 3 story 
Apartment in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Office 
  
  
  
  
  
  
11 
Office Share of 
development 
10.4 
34.2 
  
Line 2 *0.56 
56% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
12 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
20.8 
68.3 
  
Line 11 *2.0 
2.0 floor area ratio 
  
13 
Total Acres 
89.1 
  
  
12A + 12B 
  
  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-30 
 
14 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land – Office 
89.1 
  
  
Same as Line 13 
  
  
15 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land – Office 
3,881,989 
  
  
Line 14 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
16 
Value of New Office 
$115,875,312 
  
  
((Line 12A * 
1,132,301) + 
(Line 12B 
*1,052,719)) * 
1.214 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) 
= $1,132, 301 (Difference between 
Commercial & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) 
= $1,052, 719 (Difference between 
Commercial & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 21.4% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
17 
Jobs Created- Office 
5,108 
  
  
Line 15/760 
1 employee per 760 sq ft 
  
18 
Value of new office 
construction 
$544,798,352 
  
  
Line 15 * $140.3 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $140.3 
RS Means Estimation for Office 
building in ABQ Downtown 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Retail 
  
  
  
  
  
  
19 
Retail Share of 
development 
4.5 
14.6 
  
Line 2 * 0.24 
24% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
20 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
8.9 
29.3 
  
Line 19 * 2.0 
2.0 floor area ratio 
  
21 
Total Acres 
38.2 
  
  
20A + 20B 
  
  
22 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land – Retail 
38.2 
  
  
Same as line 22 
  
  
23 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land – Retail 
1,663,710 
  
  
Line 22 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
24 
Value of New Retail 
$49,660,848 
  
  
((Line 20A * 
1,132,301) + 
(Line 20B 
*1,052,719))*1.
214 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) 
= $1,132, 301 (Difference between 
Commercial & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) 
= $1,052, 719 (Difference between 
Commercial & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 21.4% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
25 
Jobs Created- Retail 
1,664 
  
  
Line 23/1000 
1 employee per 1,000 sq ft 
  
26 
Value of new retail 
construction 
$192,615,981 
  
  
Line 23 * $115.8 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $115.8 
RS Means Estimation for  3 story 
department store in ABQ Downtown 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-31 
 
2. Urban Neighborhood District 
 
 
The eight stations and their corresponding 5/8 mile buffers make up the Urban Neighborhood District. 
There are 108.5 acres (5% of the district) of vacant land and under-utilized properties, of which 62.3 
acres is projected to be developed into an equal mix of residential and retail land uses. The assumed 
floor area ratio of 1.3 accounts for a variety of residential types: multi-family, townhomes, single family. 
Offices, retail stores and restaurants will have lower floor area ratios to accommodate parking needs.


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-32 
 
Urban Neighborhood 
Ref 
No. 
  
Vacant Acres 
Underutilize
d Properties 
  
Calculation 
Assumptions 
Source 
  
  
A 
B 
  
  
  
  
1 
Downtown Buffer (acres) 
27.0 
81.5 
  
  
  
Assessor's Data 2015 
2 
80%/50% to be developed 
21.6 
40.8 
  
Line 1A * 0.8 & 
Line 1B * 0.5 
80% of vacant land and 50%  of underutilized 
properties to be developed 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Residential 
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
Residential Share of 
development 
10.0 
19.0 
  
Line 2 * 0.47 
47% 
TOD Typology 
4 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
13.1 
24.7 
  
Line 3 *1.3 
1.3 floor area ratio 
  
5 
Total Acres 
37.7 
  
  
4A + 4B 
  
  
5 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Residential 
37.7 
  
  
Same as Line 5 
  
  
6 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Residential 
1,644,119 
  
  
Line 5 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
7 
Value of New Residential 
$40,723,354 
  
  
((Line 4A * 
799,414) + 
(Line 4B 
*839,506)) * 
1.307 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre (vacant) = 
$799,414 (Difference between Residential & Vacant 
value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre (underutilized) 
= $839,506 (Difference between Residential & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 2006 
to 2015 = 30.7% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
8 
Number of Units 
1,444 
  
  
Line 5 * 38.3 
Residential Density (Units/Acre) = 38.3 
TOD Typology 
9 
Number of new residents 
3,003 
  
  
Line 8 * 2.08 
Average Household Size = 2.08 
TOD Typology 
10 
Value of new residential 
construction 
$213,225,792 
  
  
Line 6 * 129.7 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $129.7 
RS Means Estimation for 3 story 
Apartment in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Office 
  
  
  
  
  
  
11 
Office Share of 
development 
3.5 
6.5 
  
Line 2 *0.16 
16% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
12 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
3.5 
6.5 
  
Line 11 *1.0 
1.0 floor area ratio 
  
13 
Total Acres 
10.0 
  
  
12A + 12B 
  
  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-33 
 
14 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Office 
10.0 
  
  
Same as Line 
13 
  
  
15 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Office 
435,356 
  
  
Line 14 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
16 
Value of New Office 
$6,567,751 
  
  
((Line 12A * 
541,244) + 
(Line 12B 
*482,545))*1.3
07 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$541,244 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$482,545 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 2006 
to 2015 = 30.7% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
17 
Jobs Created- Office 
573 
  
  
Line 15/762 
1 employee per 760 sq ft 
  
18 
Value of new office 
construction 
$58,801,292 
  
  
Line 15 * 
$135.1 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $135.1 
RS Means Estimation for 2-4 story 
Office building in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Retail 
  
  
  
  
  
  
19 
Retail Share of 
development 
8.0 
15.1 
  
Line 2 * 0.37 
37% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
20 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
4.0 
7.5 
  
Line 19 * 0.5 
0.5 floor area ratio 
  
21 
Total Acres 
11.5 
  
  
20A + 20B 
  
  
22 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Retail 
11.5 
  
  
Same as line 22 
  
  
23 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Retail 
502,440 
  
  
Line 22 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
24 
Value of New Retail 
$7,579,785 
  
  
((Line 20A * 
541,244) + 
(Line 20B 
*482,545)) * 
1.307 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$541,244 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$482,545 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 2006 
to 2015 = 30.7% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
25 
Jobs Created- Retail 
502 
  
  
Line 23/1000 
1 employee per 1,000 sq ft 
  
26 
Value of new retail 
construction 
$59,397,202 
  
  
(Line 23 * 0.9 * 
$103.3) + (Line 
23 * 0.1 * 
$252.4) 
Building Cost per Sq Ft for Retail = $103.3 (90%)           
Building Cost per Sq Ft for Restaurant = $252.4 
(10%) 
RS Means Estimation for Retail 
Store & Restaurant in ABQ 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-34 
 
3. Town Center District 
 
 
 
The Town Center District is the largest district in size – over 5,000 acres encompassing ten stations and 
their buffer areas. Vacant and under-utilized properties make up 20% of this district. It has several auto-
oriented shopping centers and land use patterns are suburban in character with largely single-family and 
some multi-family housing. The district is projected to develop at a slower pace than the other two 
districts. Only 50% of the vacant parcels and one-third of the under-utilized properties are anticipated to 
develop in the upcoming years. Future development is assumed to preserve the residential character of 
the district with opportunities for more moderate density housing and complemented with 
neighborhood retail.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-35 
 
Town Center 
Ref 
No. 
  
Vacant Acres 
Underutilize
d Properties 
  
Calculation 
Assumptions 
Source 
  
  
A 
B 
  
  
  
  
1 
Downtown Buffer (acres) 
387.9 
630.2 
  
  
  
Assessor's Data 2015 
2 
50%/33% to be 
developed 
193.9 
209.9 
  
Line 1A * 0.5 & 
Line 1B * 0.33 
50% of vacant land and 33%  of underutilized 
properties to be developed 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Residential 
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
Residential Share of 
development 
157.7 
170.7 
  
Line 2 * 0.81 
81% 
TOD Typology 
4 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
126.2 
136.5 
  
Line 3 *0.8 
0.8 floor area ratio 
  
5 
Total Acres 
262.7 
  
  
4A + 4B 
  
  
5 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Residential 
262.7 
  
  
Same as Line 5 
  
  
6 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Residential 
11,444,063 
  
  
Line 5 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
7 
Value of New Residential 
$154,540,043 
  
  
((Line 4A * 
456,961) + 
(Line 4B 
*503,082)) * 
1.223 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre (vacant) = 
$456,961 (Difference between Residential & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre 
(underutilized) = $503,082 (Difference between 
Residential & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 22.3% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
8 
Number of Units 
4,690 
  
  
Line 5 * 17.9 
Residential Density (Units/Acre) = 17.9 
TOD Typology 
9 
Number of new residents 
12,263 
  
  
Line 8 * 2.62 
Average Household Size = 2.62 
TOD Typology 
10 
Value of new residential 
construction 
$1,484,180,548 
  
  
Line 6 * 129.7 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $129.7 
RS Means Estimation for 3 story 
Apartment in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Office 
  
  
  
  
  
  
11 
Office Share of 
development 
7.2 
7.8 
  
Line 2 *0.037 
3.7% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
12 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
3.6 
3.9 
  
Line 11 *0.5 
0.5 floor area ratio 
  
13 
Total Acres 
7.5 
  
  
12A + 12B 
  
  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-36 
 
14 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Office 
7.5 
  
  
Same as Line 
13 
  
  
15 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Office 
328,354 
  
  
Line 14 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
16 
Value of New Office 
$2,376,378 
  
  
((Line 12A * 
284,746) + 
(Line 12B 
*232,798)) * 
1.223 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$284,746 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$232,798(Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 22.3% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
17 
Jobs Created- Office 
432 
  
  
Line 15/760 
1 employee per 380 sq ft 
  
18 
Value of new office 
construction 
$44,349,168 
  
  
Line 15 * 
$135.1 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $135.1 
RS Means Estimation for 2-4 story 
Office building in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Retail 
  
  
  
  
  
  
19 
Retail Share of 
development 
29.0 
31.3 
  
Line 2 * 0.149 
14.9% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
20 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
14.5 
15.7 
  
Line 19 * 0.5 
0.5 floor area ratio 
  
21 
Total Acres 
30.2 
  
  
20A + 20B 
  
  
22 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Retail 
30.2 
  
  
Same as line 22 
  
  
23 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Retail 
1,313,417 
  
  
Line 22 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
24 
Value of New Retail 
$9,505,513 
  
  
((Line 20A * 
456,961) + 
(Line 20 B 
*503,082)) * 
1.223 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$284,746 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$232,798(Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 22.3% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
25 
Jobs Created- Retail 
1,313 
  
  
Line 23/1000 
1 employee per 1,000 sq ft 
  
26 
Value of new retail 
construction 
$155,268,879 
  
  
(Line 23 * 0.9 * 
$103.3) + (Line 
23 * 0.1 * 
$252.4) 
Building Cost per Sq Ft for Retail = $103.3 (90%)      
Building Cost per Sq Ft for Restaurant = $252.4 
(10%) 
RS Means Estimation for Retail Store & 
Restaurant in ABQ 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-37 
 
III. Findings and Recommendations  
 
A. Findings 
 
1. Discussion of Findings  
The proposed ART system will incorporate virtually all of the features that transit-oriented development 
research, including BRT studies, has shown are characteristic of transit systems that spur economic 
development:  
• 
The technical features of the ART – including its design, equipment, and service plan -- ensure 
speed, reliability, and convenience for its customers.  
• 
The ART route -- virtually the entire length of Central Avenue -- connects relatively dense 
residential neighborhoods to centers of employment, vital services, and entertainment.  
• 
In combination the ART’s technical characteristics and route will provide reliable 
accessibility to other transit services, including multiple north-south bus routes.  
• 
The ART will make a substantive, in some cases essential, contribution to numerous local 
government and institutional plans to revitalize Albuquerque’s economy and protect its 
environment, including the Preferred Scenario of the regional Long Range Transportation 
Plan, the expansion of the UNM Hospital and campus, ABQ the Plan, Innovate ABQ, STC.UNM 
(UNM technology transfer non-profit organization), the Downtown ABQ Mainstreet Initiative56 
and the Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan. Accordingly, local government is fully 
committed to support the ART, in part through the use of promotional efforts and incentives 
that have been applied in Albuquerque’s MRA program, and in part by establishing a consistent 
zoning environment that will encourage intensive development in transit corridors through the 
Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) process.  
• 
The private market has shown its readiness to invest in the ART corridor through some 17 
mixed-use, multifamily building, or commercial projects that have been built in this corridor 
within the last three years, with at least 12 additional projects proposed. Several developers of 
these projects have expressed their expectation that the ART will make an important 
contribution to the success of their investments.  
 
In light of these facts, CNT conservatively projects that the ART will stimulate the redevelopment of 80% 
of the vacant or severely under-utilized real estate parcels within a 5/8 mile radius of its Central Avenue 
route. In this projection CNT anticipates that the type of uses to which these properties will be  
redeveloped will mirror current land use in the same station areas and that the level of intensity to 
which these properties will be redeveloped will correspond to the middle range of fixed guideway 
transit station areas with these types of land use, per national data sets. These projected developments 
could occur over period as brief as 10 or as long as 20 years. The results of these projections are 
summarized on the following table.  
 
                                                          
56 Downtown ABQ Mainstreet Initiative, http://www.abqmainstreet.org. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015. 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  Summary of Projected New Development Linked to Implementation of the ART  
Station Areas 
Assessed Value 
Residents 
Residential 
Units 
Office 
Jobs  
Retail 
Jobs 
Development Value 
Downtown  
 $        197,359,099  
           
2,169  
            
1,146  
     
5,108  
       
1,664  
 $                917,219,750  
Urban 
Neighborhoods 
 $          54,870,890  
           
3,003  
            
1,444  
        
573  
   502  
 $                331,424,286  
Town Center  
 $        166,421,934  
         
12,263  
            
4,690  
        
432  
       
1,313  
 $             1,683,798,595  
Total 
 $        418,646,923  
         
17,435  
            
7,280  
     
6,113  
       
3,479  
 $             2,932,442,631  
 
Through the limited scope of CNT’s assignment, these projected outcomes reflect only direct 
development from the conversion of vacant and under-utilized properties to productive use. This 
analysis does not calculate additions to public revenues through property taxes on increased assessed 
value or sales taxes generated by new or expanded businesses and their employees. The analysis also 
does not include estimates of induced or indirect benefits, which would require the application of an 
econometric model.  
 
The scale of the direct development projected here would have a significant impact on Albuquerque’s 
land use, travel patterns, and economy. The level of these projections might be compared to the 
developments projected by members of Albuquerque’s chapter of NAIOP, in the January 2014 
presentation noted earlier, which included $941m in development value, 3,900 residential units, 3,300 
office jobs, and 2,100 retail jobs. The NAIOP members’ projections were based on the development of 
64 specific locations, most of which front directly on Central Avenue, rather than considering the 
entire 5/8 mile radius buffer around Central; it was also limited to Downtown and Urban 
Neighborhood station areas and did not include the Town Center station areas. The NAIOP members’ 
projections also did not have the benefit of extensive data from fixed guideway station areas around 
the nation that were instrumental in framing CNT’s projection assumptions.  
 
One aspect of this comparison in which the NAIOP members’ projections may be more predictive than 
CNT’s is in the number of residential units to be constructed in Downtown and Urban Neighborhood 
station areas. Although CNT’s projections of Downtown station area housing are more reflective of 
the most recent data for the built environment of US station areas, national market demand for 
higher levels of Downtown housing have been documented, and a number of Downtown and Urban 
Neighborhood TOD projects now in active development are delivering high concentrations of 
residential units. If NAIOP members, who are actually building projects in Albuquerque, are correct in 
thinking that higher levels of residential units will be developed in central portions of the ART corridor, 
this would be a positive outcome for travel patterns and economic development in Albuquerque.   
 
ART corridor projections should also be considered in the context of developments in other cities 
discussed in Section I.G. of this report. While $2.9b in anticipated development investment is a figure 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-39 
 
that triggers a deep intake of breath, it is in the midrange of reported development investments 
linked to comparable BRT and other fixed guideway systems, sometimes in fair to weak markets, 
sometimes with less technically advanced systems than the proposed ART, and realized within shorter 
periods of time than CNT has projected.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A further important consideration is the extent to which projected direct development impacts of the 
ART will contribute to the realization of the Preferred Scenario in MRCOG’s Long Range Transportation 
Plan for the Albuquerque region.  As noted earlier, the Preferred Scenario represents the Albuquerque 
metropolitan area’s best strategy for solving its transportation congestion and air quality problems and 
supporting the development of its economy to a competitive 21st Century level. To achieve some key 
objectives of the Preferred Scenario, which are noted in the following table, the region will need to 
locate approximately 23,000 additional households and create some 30,000 jobs within a quarter mile of 
transit stations by the Year 2040. The projections of this report concern a 5/8 mile buffer around the 
ART route, but the large bulk of the expected development will occur within a quarter mile of the ART 
stations. So by a rough approximation, nearly 30% of the development required to meet the Preferred 
Scenario’s objectives will be achieved when the development projected for the ART corridor is realized.   
 
  
 
Projected ART-Linked Development & Preferred Scenario Requirements57 
Required 
Development 
within Transit 
Station Areas 
2012 
2040 
Required 
Development 
ART-Linked 
Projected 
Development 
ART-Linked 
Development  
Contribution 
Households  
19646 
43151 
23505 
7280 
31% 
Jobs 
97153 
127421 
30268 
9592 
32% 
 
Thirty percent of required regional development in one corridor over a 10 to 20 year period is certainly a 
major contribution to the Preferred Scenario. However, this is the corridor that includes downtown 
Albuquerque and a number of the region’s primary employment and activity institutions, and it is the 
only corridor in the region for which true rapid transit service has been proposed in detail. To achieve 
the objectives of the Preferred Scenario, every piece of projected development in the ART corridor must 
be realized as quickly as possible, and accomplishments within this corridor must give rise to additional 
enhanced transit services and linked development.   
 
2. Summary of Findings      
CNT’s recommendations are driven by its basic findings:  
(1) The ART – as currently proposed with its technical and service characteristics, route, and 
constructive interface with other key development initiatives – is poised to stimulate economic 
development within a 5/8 mile buffer around Central Avenue that includes:  
• 
$2.9b in the value of new development  
                                                          
57 MRCOG, “2040 Long Range Metropolitan Transportation Plan”,  Figures drawn from Table 2-12: Select 
Performance Measures, 2012, 2040 Trend and Preferred Scenarios http://www.mrcog-
nm.gov/transportation/metro-planning/long-range-mtp   


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-40 
 
• 
$418m in increased assessed property value  
• 
7,280 new residential units  
• 
9,592 new jobs  
(2) The features of the proposed ART that create its value are interdependent, e.g.:  
• 
The assets and development potential of the Central Avenue route justify the public investment 
in the ART’s technical features, and these features are essential to a qualitative improvement in 
transit service that will incentivize further development in the Central Avenue corridor.   
• 
The nine-mile route linking communities west of the Rio Grande to Albuquerque’s downtown 
are essential to achieving anticipated congestion mitigation, and the ridership drawn east by the 
ART will add vitality to the city’s downtown and urban neighborhoods.  
• 
The ART will provide a basic amenity for the urban work environment and lifestyle that is a 
requirement for the success of such initiatives as Innovate ABQ and technology sharing 
programs of the UNM, and the success of these initiatives will drive the ridership of the ART.      
(3)  Substantial as development directly linked to the ART is projected to be, this development alone 
will not be sufficient to achieve the growth in transit station areas required by the Preferred 
Scenario of MRCOG’s Long Range Transportation Plan. To achieve substantive regional change, the 
impact of the ART will need to be felt as early as possible, and it will need to enhance currently 
interconnecting transit services and give rise to others.   
 
B.  Recommendations   
 
Protect the integrity of the ART plan and implement the full service as proposed.  In resolving any issues 
related to the implementation of a transit service in a busy urban corridor, such as parking or left turn 
options at specific locations, chose solutions that do not the compromise service capabilities of the ART. 
Certainly reject any misguided suggestion to deviate the route of the ART from the “truly central” 
Central Avenue corridor that is essential for the synergy between rapid transit service and a directly 
served healthy market. Building and operating the full ART as proposed should not be problematic if 
complete funding can be secured by a pending federal Small Starts grant and local funds now committed 
as a match. However, if additional funds are needed, these should be sought through other federal grant 
programs and local sources. If necessary, prudent borrowing through federal programs that are readily 
available during 2016 should be used. Any cuts in operating capacity, service, or route which would 
undermine the connectivity or reliability of the ART should be considered only as a last resort. Such 
diminutions can easily lead to public perceptions that the transit service is not valuable, impressions that 
could result in decreased ridership and reduced private investment in the transit corridor, driving a 
downward cycle that would be difficult to reverse.  
 
A corollary to implementing the entire ART as planned is to implement it swiftly. The experience of other 
cities shows that substantial private investments in transit corridor housing and businesses may be 
expected as soon as the plans for a fixed guideway transit service are definitely determined. The 
economic impacts from a transit service investment take decades to fully unfold. The sooner a project 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-41 
 
begins, the sooner it will yield economic benefits and provide a basis for extending complimentary 
transit services and transit-oriented development corridors.     
 
Accelerate Development of the Second ART Line and Ancillary Services: The envisioned second ART 
line, which will link the Albuquerque International Sunport  and a large section of the city to Downtown 
and the University of New Mexico, should be implemented with all possible speed. The value of a transit 
system depends to a large degree in its connectivity. To the extent that the ART offers access to more 
destinations it will be more widely used and the value of properties with access to it will grow. For the 
same reason connections from ART stations via conventional bus service or shuttle services to major 
retail or commercial centers should be studied and optimized whenever possible. Possible funding 
mechanisms for such service may be Transportation Management Associations (TMAs) – associations of 
employers that contribute financially to services that benefit their workers and enlarge their job or 
customer pool.   
 
Prioritize Compatible Zoning, Economic Development Programs, and Mixed-Income Community 
Development in the ART Corridor.  While development projects in the Central Avenue – ART Corridor 
will enjoy strategic advantages from the concentration of existing businesses and institutions and from  
the ART service, these projects will require public sector support, and such support can contribute to the 
equitable distribution of development benefits. 
• 
Fundamentally, development projects in the corridor should have by right zoning that permits 
construction at the level of density appropriate to Downtown, Urban Neighborhood, or Town Center 
transit station areas. Such density should be accompanies by building standards and public 
investments that create pedestrian-friendly environments and a sense of place in transit-served 
neighborhoods. Ensuring such zoning and public space compatibility should be a principal objective 
of Albuquerque’s Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) process.  
• 
Recognizing that economic development assistance in the ART corridor is likely to generate success 
and yield regional benefits from creating housing and jobs in transit-served locations, the economic 
development programs of the region should coordinate tax incentives, low-interest financing, 
workforce training, and other enterprise support programs to ensure the development of ART 
station areas.  
• 
City and regional planners should also expect that property values in ART neighborhoods will rise, 
potentially leading to the displacement of some lower-income households but also creating 
opportunities to establish thriving mixed income communities in keeping with HUD’s Affirmatively 
Furthering Fair Housing guidelines. By ensuring that residential developments contain a mix of 
market rate and affordable units, considering the development of land trusts in selected locations, 
and focusing job training and placement efforts to aid residents in filling the jobs generated in the 
corridor, public initiatives can help to deliver the benefits of ART-linked development to all local 
residents.  
 
 
 


 
D-1 
Appendix D 
 
City’s TOD Planning Grant Application 
 
Applicant and Proposal Profile 
(Pilot Program for Transit-Oriented Development Planning)   
   
Section I. Applicant Information 
Is this a resubmission due to an invalid/error message from FTA?   Yes        
√   No  
Organization Legal Name: City of Albuquerque 
FTA Recipient ID number:    1523 
  
Section II. Comprehensive Planning Project Background 
(Changes from original submission are in green throughout) 
  
Project Title:  TOD Planning for Albuquerque’s Central Avenue Corridor (Descriptive title of this project) 
  
Specify the transit project with which the proposed comprehensive planning work is associated. 
Provide the URL of a map of the transit project corridor if available: 
Central Avenue Corridor Bus Rapid Transit Project: http://bit.ly/1s05T30 , locally referred to as the 
Albuquerque Rapid Transit or “ART” project 
  
ID boundaries of the portion of the transit project corridor the proposed planning work wiII address: 
Planning work will address the entire transit project corridor, i.e., an approximately 17-mile stretch of 
Central Avenue (formerly Route 66). It includes a study area approximately one-mile wide along the 
corridor, from Tramway Boulevard on the east to Unser on the west. The corridor intersects 
Downtown,  Old Town, multiple Regional Employment Centers (e.g. Presbyterian Hospital, UNM 
Campus, etc.), Urban Center, and Activity Centers. It also includes the ART north-south service 
between Central Avenue and Uptown via Louisiana Boulevard. 
  
Summarize the work plan for the comprehensive planning work by task. Be sure to address: 
- How the work plan addresses all six aspects of the general authority stipulated in MAP-21 Section 
20005(b)(2) 
-The schedule for each task, major milestones and the overall planning effort 
- Partner entities (including key staff with job titles) & their roles and responsibilities for each task 
- Whether the proposed work will examine innovative financial tools such as value capture 
- Final deliverables 
  
An approximately two yearlong revamp of the City of Albuquerque’s Comp Plan and Zoning Code is 
underway in a process called “ABC->Z”. TOD planning for the Central Avenue corridor will complement  
the Presidential recommendation of funding, and the anticipated award of, a Small Starts grant for the 


 
D-2 
Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART) BRT project. That planning effort will inform and support efforts along 
a second transit corridor (University Avenue) in which a second BRT line connecting the airport to the 
UNM Health Sciences Center is anticipated by Rio Metro (the project lead) to move to design 
development by the summer of 2016.  
 
As ABC->Z develops, TOD planning work will engage stakeholders, such as the UNM school of 
Architecture and Planning, local trade associations for developers, apartment owners & managers, 
community and place-based organization and other key stakeholders, to “field test”  emerging 
regulations in the actual transit corridor(s). This process will reveal issues and opportunities and enable 
appropriate revisions before the regulations are finalized. New goals, policies, and recommended capital 
projects will encourage economic development and enhanced transit service within the corridor, with 
implementation that includes potential value capture tools to foster reinvestment in infrastructure 
improvements overtime. The new zoning code (Integrated Development Ordinance or IDO ) wiII address 
economic development, ridership, and mode choice  through zone changes, development incentives for 
TOD development, and complete street standards to enable mixed-use development and increase 
allowable densities within the corridor.  The work plan includes robust private sector participation and 
coordination with private developers, business and institutional organizations (NAIOP, Urban Land 
Institute, and Chambers of Commerce), and affordable housing agencies to remove barriers to TOD, 
provide meaningful incentives and/or public-private partnerships, and catalyze private investment. 
(MAP-21 Section 20005(b)(2)(A,D,& F)) 
  
The project facilitates multimodal connectivity and accessibility by coordinating with regional long-range 
transportation planning and identifying/prioritizing infrastructure improvements needed to enhance 
pedestrian and bicycle access to and within the corridor in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and 
with changing requirements for multi-modal cross sections based on the character and context of the 
built environment in the IDO.(MAP-21 Section 20005(b)(2)(B, C, & E)) 
  
The City of Albuquerque Economic Development Department will provide overall coordination for this 
project, in close collaboration with the City’s Transit Department (ABQ Ride) and other departments 
which will take the lead on various aspects of the TOD planning in addition to their own respective 
leadership of the two major work efforts already in process: the BRT construction itself (led by Transit) 
and the ABC->Z process (led by Planning). 
 
Programmatically, a “Corridors Initiative” has been created to advance TOD planning across agencies 
and community partners--including both those in the Central Corridor, and along University Boulevard 
which will likely be the location of Albuquerque’s second BRT in a few years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
D-3 
Project Partners Among City Departments 
 
Economic Development 
While the different departments will take the lead on various aspects of the TOD planning grant, the 
Economic Development Department will provide coordination for this grant’s transit oriented 
development focus.    
-Gary Oppedahl, Director, (Primary role: Communitywide Champion) 
-Deirdre Firth, Deputy Director, (Internal Cross-Departmental Champion) 
-Brian Reilly, ABQ Corridors Initiative (Lead Staff) 
-Vanessa Roanhorse, Team Leader, Small Business Resource Collaborative  
 
Transit 
ABQ RIDE is the lead on the construction of the Albuquerque Rapid Transit project, upon which this TOD 
planning effort rests. Within the planning grant, ABQ Ride will be responsible for all grant reporting and 
expenditure monitoring, as well as be a departmental partner on this project, assisting the land use 
development and planning effort related to the augmentation of the ART project, namely the station 
area planning and analysis, infrastructure improvements, capital improvements implementation, and 
public involvement. 
-Dayna Crawford, Deputy Director (Key ART interface) 
-Lawrence Kline FAICP and Andrew de Garmo, Principal Planners (station area land use and transit 
connectivity leads, respectively) 
-Katherine Cordova, Outreach Specialist (Community Engagement lead) 
-Vanessa Baca, Marketing Manager (Transit marketing lead) 
 
Planning 
This department is the lead on the revision of the City’s Comprehensive Plan (Comp Plan), ABC->Z, and 
the overhaul of the existing zoning code into an Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO). Through close 
coordination and collaboration with this TOD planning grant, these documents will be modified during 
the review and approval process to ensure the City’s regulatory structure not only supports but guides 
development in these corridors toward successful TOD outcomes. 
-Russell Brito, Manager (Key interface for all regulation and permitting, including property acquisition) 
-Rebecca Velarde, Manager, Municipal Redevelopment Authority (Disposition of MR properties in 
Corridor) 
-Mikaela Renz-Whitmore, Terra Reed, Planners (Leads on Comp Plan/IDO Key staff interface with TOD 
team and targeted stakeholders for outreach efforts, respectively) 
-Linda Rumpf, Planner (Route 66 Action Plan project manager, Corridor institutional and key partner 
relationship manager) 
  
Family and Community Services 
This department is the City’s Block Grant and anti-poverty funds administrator and will collaborate with 
the TOD planning on affordable housing issues and funding streams. This department will help with our 
efforts to mitigate gentrification and displacement throughout this process.  


 
D-4 
-Doug Chaplin, Director (Lead strategist on funding policy and administration) 
-Valerie Bargas, Division Manager (UDAG and similar program funding manager) 
-Rick Giron II, Project Manager Community Services (Housing project financing) 
 
 
Highlights of changes since original submission: 
● Planning efforts are now oriented towards achieving identified $2 billion reinvestment potential 
and $1 billion in savings to households identified by an unprecedented county-wide 10 year 
property value study by the Center for Neighborhood Technology. 
● Stronger and deeper public engagement and “civic infrastructure” strengthening (such as use of 
place-based partners, Community Fellows, community facilitation training.). 
● The 11,000-acre Central Avenue Corridor remains the focus of the work, but will also include the 
ART route to/from Uptown, a fast growing primary regional office and retail market. 
● City, MPO and other agency staff will also coordinate and share information with the University 
Avenue Corridor proposal to the degree resources allow. 
● TOD planning will be closely coordinated with ABC->Z IDO approvals to “field test” regulations as 
they go through the review and approval process for inclusion in the zoning code. 
● Stronger reliance on staff across departments to accomplish the work, strengthen long term 
relationships among partners and agencies, and embed plans into city departments and ways of 
doing business.  
● Background studies will precede and inform consultant-led station area planning in Task 2.0. 
● Time frames assuming final approvals allow a July 2016 start. 
  
  
  
 
 


 
D-5 
ORIGINAL SUBMISSION 
CURRENT  SUBMISSION 
Task 0.0 Stakeholder Cultivation, 
Strengthening of Civic Infrastructure, 
Preparatory Studies (Jun-Oct 2016) 
  
0.0 Complete and issue needed RFPs and 
procurement, execute needed contracts 
0.1 Preliminary Stakeholder Engagement  and 
academic/research support via a one-year 
MOU with UNM 
0.2 GIS data preparation and community 
mapping support 
0.3 Community facilitator training & public 
storytelling infrastructure; identification of up 
to five Community Fellows  
Background studies: 
0.4 Construction cost report [Final Deliverable] 
0.5 Public sector financial ROI model [Final 
Deliverable] (incorporating job density and tax 
value per acre to complement other local 
measures, and supporting value capture 
exploration) 
0.6 Gentrification report [Final Deliverable]: 
Analyze and identify areas in the corridor likely 
to experience gentrification. Recommend 
potential mitigation measures, and other 
policy/regulation changes based on best 
practice research and inputs from 
neighborhoods and housing agencies and 
advocates. 
0.7 Infrastructure needs report [Final 
Deliverable]: Analyze and identify 
infrastructure needed to support TOD 
(selected utilities capacity, etc.) in priority 
redevelopment areas. 
  
TASK 1.0 PROJECT KICKOFF (January- April 
2015) 
  
1.1 Confirm work plan, schedule, 
Task 1.0 Partner Organization and Planning 
Firm Consultations (Jul 2016-Jan 2017) 
 
1.1 Confirm work plan, schedule, 


 
D-6 
roles/responsibilities, and public engagement 
strategy. 
  
1.2 Research best practices for TOD & zoning, 
multimodal transportation standards, 
innovative financial tools, and gentrification 
mitigation. 
  
1.3 Compile baseline data and create profiles 
for transit station areas, corridor segments, 
and Activity Centers 
  
1.4 Coordinate with other planning efforts 
(e.g., Central Avenue BRT project; the 2040 
MTP's preferred scenario, Climate Change 
Futures model, and Long Range Transportation 
System and Transit System maps; Innovation 
Corridor public-private partnership; 
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency plans, 
etc.). 
  
 
 
 
1.5 Engage stakeholders throughout the 
corridor  through walking, biking, and transit 
tours; interviews  with developers, property 
owners, and institutions; focus groups with 
open space/parks, health, bike and pedestrian, 
homeless, and physical disability advocates, 
housing agencies, and business and developer 
groups (NAIOP,ULI, Chambers of Commerce); 
public workshops; neighborhood association 
meetings; and moderated online forums 
(Milestone- April 2015). 
  
roles/responsibilities and public engagement 
strategy 
 
1.2 Research best practices for TOD & Zoning, 
multimodal transportation standards, 
innovative finance tools, and gentrification 
mitigation 
 
1.3 Compile baseline data and create profiles 
for transit station areas, corridor segments, 
and Activity Centers 
  
1.4 Coordinate with other long range planning 
efforts (e.g., Central Avenue BRT project; the 
2040 MTP's Preferred Scenario, Climate 
Change Futures Model, and Long Range 
Transportation System and Transit System 
maps; Innovation Corridor public-private 
partnership; Metropolitan Redevelopment 
Agency plans, 2030 District, Complete Streets 
Ordinance, etc.). & within capacity constraints 
the University Boulevard transit corridor 
project. 
 
1.5 Engage stakeholders throughout the 
corridor through walking, biking, and transit 
tours; interviews with developers, property 
owners, and institutions; focus groups with 
open space/parks, public health, bike and 
pedestrian, homeless, and physical disability 
advocates, housing agencies, and business and 
developer groups (NAIOP,ULI, Chambers of 
Commerce); public workshops; neighborhood 
association meetings; and online forums 
(Milestone-Nov 2016). 
TASK 2.0 VISION & IMPLEMENTATION 
STRATEGIES (March-September 2015) 
  
 
  
Task 2.0  Corridor Visioning, Station Area 
Engagement, Planning and Priority Consensus 
Building (Aug 2016-Apr 2017) 
 


 
D-7 
2.1 Create a community inventory of existing 
/desired character in each corridor segment 
and activity center based on plans, 
development trends, and accessibility/facilities, 
for all transport modes. Recommend policy and 
regulatory changes and/or infrastructure 
needs. Gather data and analyses with 
stakeholders via tours, photo documentation, 
focus groups, etc. 
  
2.2 Calibrate MPO’s land use and 
transportation models with land development 
policies, zoning , transportation standards, and 
market conditions to understand the impacts 
of potential changes on the transportation 
network. Recommend changes to goals, 
policies, capital projects (infrastructure, 
affordable housing, etc) zoning and 
transportation standards] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Financial Strategies Report (Final 
Deliverable): Analyze and identify areas in the 
corridor  with high potential for value capture, 
development incentives, and other innovative 
financial tools based on tasks 1.2 and 2.1. 
 
2.4 Gentrification Report (Final Deliverable): 
Analyze and identify areas in the corridor  likely 
to experience gentrification. Recommend 
potential mitigation measures and/or 
policy/regulation changes based on best 
practices research and input from 
neighborhoods and housing agencies and 
2.1 Create a community inventory of existing 
/desired character in each corridor segment 
and activity center based on plans, 
development trends, and 
accessibility/facilities, for all transportation 
modes. Recommend policy and regulatory 
changes and/or infrastructure needs. Gather 
data and analyses with stakeholders via tours, 
photo documentation, focus groups, etc. 
 
2.2  Review and analyze: 
a.  Compiled material provided by the City 
(anticipated to include an inventory of existing 
character; relevant area plans & studies in the 
past five years, usability/connectivity 
assessments/audits, among others.) 
b.    Completed background studies expected 
to be completed by other contractors by 
September 2016, including Construction cost 
report, Gentrification report, and 
Infrastructure needs report. Use these and 
other constraints to temper scenarios to be 
developed for stakeholder consideration and 
eventual recommendations. 
c.   Identify any additional information that 
consultants feel is pertinent to the project. 
Demonstrate why this information is 
necessary. 
 
2.3 Unchanged, but moved to 4.3 
2.4  Unchanged, but moved to 0.6 
2.5 Unchanged, but moved to 0.7 
 
2.3 Identify station areas for in-depth study 
and analysis.     
a. Identify how many, which specific station 
areas will receive in depth attention, and why.  
b.    Describe how corridor-wide 
recommendations will address all station areas 
and/or station types throughout the corridor 
(e.g. downtown, urban neighborhood and 


 
D-8 
advocates. 
  
2.5 Infrastructure Needs Report (Final 
Deliverable): Analyze and identify 
infrastructure needed to support the Central 
Ave. BRT project, enhance pedestrian and 
bicycle access to and within  the corridor,and 
support TOD (utilities capacity, etc.). 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
town center used in CNT report, or other such 
classification). 
 
2.4   Develop and document concept [Final 
Deliverable] for station areas of focus, and 
other station areas by type, developed with 
and supported by sufficient number and or 
types of public engagement participants. 
Concept shall include strategies to achieve 
station area goals and desired outcomes, 
feasible pathways to implementation, and 
identification of constraints and barriers to 
success.  Develop format for conveying the 
resulting vision to stakeholders and others 
over time.  Station plan area concept shall 
include, but not be limited to the following: 
a. “last mile” multi-modal connections,  
b. Proposing mixed use and affordable 
housing sites and strategies,  
c. Determining circulation and parking 
(including shared parking 
opportunities, and the location and 
timing of needed parking structures.  
2.5 Develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
[Final Deliverable] to include how the effort 
will be organized, any phases, strategies for 
stakeholder identification, and the anticipated 
number and types of events for in-depth 
engagement with multiple feedback loops. 
a. Develop and review scenarios that build 
toward stakeholder consensus focusing on 
feasible strategies that have the most 
potential to contribute to the development 
ROI goals given market and other 
conditions. Design a communications strategy 
and capacities needed to ensure broad 
awareness of, and inclusion in, the outreach 
and consensus efforts.  
 


 
D-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.6 Meet with relevant agencies and 
stakeholders to vet ideas early in their 
development and coordinate with ongoing 
initiative, ensure seamless implementation and 
identify possibilities and priorities. 
  
2.7 Recommend priority actions and projects 
from each of the reports for the Comp Plan 
implementation section. 
2.6     Generate a Station Areas Strategies 
Report [Final Deliverable] with 
recommendations supported by the public 
engagement process (and measures to track 
their progress over time) to realistically 
achieve the desired $2b/$1b goals including: 
a.  any needed changes to draft regulatory 
documents (ABC->Z) 
b.  design considerations 
c.  identification of key opportunities 
d.  the removal of barriers (including public 
policies and private practices, as applicable) 
e.  anticipated utility needs 
f.  the creation of incentives toward highest 
yield development 
g.  potential private sector and other 
partnerships 
h.  prioritized public sector project pipelines 
for various investments and needed financing 
and funding mechanisms. 
i.  Equity & economic inclusion considerations 
2.7 Meet with relevant agencies and 
stakeholders to vet ideas early in their 
development and coordinate with ongoing 
initiative, ensure seamless implementation 
and identify possibilities and priorities. 
 
2.8 Recommend priority actions and projects 
from each of the reports and 2.6 for the Comp 
Plan Implementation section. 
 
TASK 3.0 COMP PLAN UPDATES (July 2015-Mar 
2016) 
  
3.1 Develop goals, policies, and 
implementation strategies pertaining to 
regional and corridor multimodal connectivity, 
performance measures (such as?), and land 
use/transportation coordination to encourage 
TOD. Develop policy maps for land use and 
TASK 3.0 Comp Plan Updates  (Sept - Dec 
2016) 
 
3.1 Review compiled recommendations on 
goals, policies, and implementation strategies 
pertaining to regional and corridor multimodal 
connectivity, performance measures, and land 
use/transportation coordination to encourage 
TOD. Develop policy maps for land use and 


 
D-10 
transportation hierarchy of modes within a 
regional network. 
  
3.2 Hold public workshops  to gather input  on 
maps, goals/policies, implementation 
priorities, and timeframes. (Milestone- 
September 2015) 
  
3.3 Develop the final draft of Comp Plan 
Updates (Final Deliverable) for adoption. 
transportation hierarchy of modes within a 
regional network. 
 
3.2 Use collected information from tasks above 
to compile a report with recommended 
additions/modifications to Comp Plan in close 
coordination with ABC—>Z process  [Final 
deliverable & Milestone] 
  
     
TASK 4.0 UDO (October 2015-Decr 2016) 
  
4.1 Model and perform economic analyses of 
future land use and zoning changes in the 
corridor against the baseline and performance 
measures. Create onIine zone comparison tools 
for public review of proposed changes. 
4.2 Conduct public meetings in a variety of 
formats with relevant stakeholder groups and 
the general public to share initial assessments 
and generate feedback on strategic directions 
for land use and transportation changes. 
  
4.3 Develop drafts of new and revised zones 
and transportation standards with input from  
relevant stakeholders, key staff from other 
planning efforts, and relevant agencies. 
  
4.4 Develop final UDO draft (Final Deliverable) 
based on public  input and agency review. 
  
4.5 Submit the final UDO draft for adoption 
(Milestone- October 2016). 
  
TASK 4  IDO (Nov 2016 –May 2017) 
 
4.1 Model and perform economic analyses of 
future land use scenarios and zoning changes 
against baseline and performance measures 
toward $2 billion in corridor real estate 
reinvestment. 
4.2 Use collected information from tasks above 
to compile a report with recommended 
additions/modifications to Comp Plan in close 
coordination with ABC->Z process  [Final 
deliverable & Milestone]  
  
4.3. Financial Strategies Report (final 
deliverable): Analyze and identify areas in the 
corridor with high potential for value capture, 
development incentives, and other innovative 
financial tools based on tasks 1.2 and 2.1. 
  
TASK 5 Household Expenditure Reduction 
(Mar-Dec 2017) 
 
5.1 Conduct transit connectivity & ridership 
analyses, including from user’s perspective, 
and identify a project pipeline and partners for 


 
D-11 
“last mile” connections and measures for 
increased ridership and shared benefits. 
 
5.2 Coordinate affordable housing strategies in 
the corridor to leverage place-based 
efficiencies. Identify and align multiple funding 
streams into a project pipeline. 
 
5.3. Explore with utilities and community 
partners, the potential value of combined 
utility efficiency upgrades/retrofits in station 
area residential units. If proven feasible, 
outline a program design, highlighting spatial 
and place-based elements and provide to 
external partners for further development and 
deployment. 
 
5.4. Conduct a financial capacity source and 
flow analysis with development stakeholders 
(financial institutions, community 
development funders and actors, development 
professionals, etc.) to identify the barriers to 
prioritized, predictable, systematic residential 
and commercial TOD investment potential 
uses of value capture, and possible public -
private partnerships. 
   
   
Identify specific goals in the metropolitan transportation plan and existing local plans in the 
transit project corridor that the proposed planning work supports: 
MTP 2040: http://www.mrcog-nm.gov/transportation/metro-planning/long-range-
mtp?showall=&start=1.Enhance the livability, safety, and environmental conditions of the region 
through ... sustainable transportation decisions. Develop a transportation system that promotes 
economic activity and vitality in the region,... [and] provide[s] an affordable, efficient, multi-modal and 
safe transportation network.  Also, we will give particular attention to alternative land use scenarios in 
the corridor and assess their impact on regional performance.  
 
CITY’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: http://abc-zone.com/ Expand and strengthen concentrations of 
moderate and high-density mixed land use and social/economic activities that reduce urban sprawl, 
auto travel needs, and service costs, and enhance the identity of Albuquerque and its communities. 
Develop corridors (both streets and adjacent land uses) that provide a balanced circulation system 


 
D-12 
through efficient placement of employment and services, and encouragement of bicycling, walking, 
and use of transit/paratransit as alternatives to automobile travel. 
 
AREA PLAN: West Side Strategic Plan  
LOCAL PLANS: East Gateway, Downtown 2025, Downtown Neighborhood Area ) Historic Central , 
Municipal Redevelopment Plans 
Is the applicant the sponsor of the transit project?  √ Yes       No                                                                 
Is the applicant responsible for land use planning in at least a portion of the transit project corridor?                                  
√  Yes       No 
  
If you answered 'no'  to one of the last two questions, attach to your SF424 application  evidence of a partnership (such as 
a memorandum of  agreement  or letter  of intent  that  describes the  parties'  roles and  responsibilities)between the 
transit project sponsor and at least one entity in the project corridor with land use planning authority. 
 
 
 
Project Budget 
Pilot Program for TOD Planning 
 
 
 
 
MAJOR TASK 
 
REQUEST 
OTHER 
FED 
 LOCAL 
MATCH 
TOTAL COST 
BY TASK 
TASK 0.0 Stakeholder Cultivation, 
Strengthening of Civic 
Infrastructure, Preparatory Studies 
Jun-Sep 
$230,000 
 $             
 
 
$81,667 
$311,667 
TASK 1.0 Partner Organization and 
Planning Firm Consultations 
Jul –Jan 
$40,000 
 $             
 
  
$16,667 
$56,667 
TASK 2.0  Corridor Visioning, 
Station Area Engagement, Planning 
and Priority Consensus Building 
Aug-Mar 
$453,100 
 $             
 
 
 $25,000 
$478,100 
TASK 3.0 Comp Plan 
Sep-Dec 
$21,000 
 $             
 
 
$16,667 
$37,667 
TASK 4.0 IDO 
Nov-May 
$34,000 
 $             
 
 
$16,667 
$50,667 
TASK 5.0 Household Expenditure 
Reduction 
Mar-Dec 
$81,900 
 $             
 
 
$58,332 
$140,232 
Totals 
 
$860,000 
 $             $215,000 
$1,075,000 


 
D-13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Congressional Districts Affected by the Project 
Congressional District: NM-001      Congressional Representative: Michelle Lujan Grisham 
Section Ill. Evaluation Criteria 
Demonstrated Need 
  
What are the barriers to transit-oriented 
development in the corridor and how wiII the 
proposed work overcome them? 
 
Our 1975 Zoning Code reflects the auto-
oriented, single-purpose approach to land use 
and transportation reflective of its time.  
While the City has adopted sector 
development plans and overlay districts within 
the corridor as band-aids to encourage and/or 
mandate transit-oriented and transit-
supportive development, the resulting tangle 
of conflicting and competing goals, policies, 
and regulations has created barriers to the 
few forward-thinking developers willing to risk 
transit-oriented development, despite very 
little market pressure. The City's economy is 
heavily dependent on federal spending (i.e., 
Sandia National Labs, Kirtland Air Force Base, 
etc.),and declining federal budgets coupled 
with job loss associated with sequestration 
and the government shutdown in October 
2012 have had a significant negative effect on 
our development market, beyond the general 
stagnation following the 2008 recession. In 
addition to being a sprawling, auto-oriented 
western city, Albuquerque also faces an 
impending congestion crisis caused by a 
regional imbalance of bedroom communities 
west of the Rio Grande and over 90% of the 
region's employment east of the river. Central 
What are the barriers to transit-oriented 
development in the corridor and how wiII the 
proposed work overcome them? 
 
Our 1975 Zoning Code reflects the auto-
oriented, single-purpose approach to land use 
and transportation reflective of its time.  While 
the City has adopted sector development plans 
and overlay districts within the corridor as 
band-aids to encourage and/or mandate 
transit-oriented and transit-supportive 
development, the resulting tangle of conflicting 
and competing goals, policies, and regulations 
has created barriers to the few forward-
thinking developers willing to risk transit-
oriented development, despite very little 
market pressure. The City's economy is heavily 
dependent on federal spending (i.e., Sandia 
National Labs, Kirtland Air Force Base, etc.),and 
declining federal budgets coupled with job loss 
associated with sequestration and the 
government shutdown in October 2012 have 
had a significant negative effect on our 
development market, beyond the general 
stagnation following the 2008 recession. In 
addition to being a sprawling, auto-oriented 
western city, Albuquerque also faces an 
impending congestion crisis caused by a 
regional imbalance of bedroom communities 
west of the Rio Grande and over 90% of the 
region's employment east of the river. Central 


 
D-14 
Ave. has the largest transit mode share of any 
city street. In order to leverage this success 
and support the BRT project, the City will 
replace its zoning code, update transportation 
standards, and consolidate all standalone 
plans into a Unified Development Ordinance, 
incentivizing TOD and streamlining approvals. 
  
Ave. has the largest transit mode share of any 
city street. In order to leverage this success and 
support the BRT project, the City will replace its 
zoning code, update transportation standards, 
and consolidate all standalone plans into an 
Integrated Development Ordinance, 
incentivizing TOD and streamlining approvals. 
Further, a recent county-wide property value 
analysis for the corridor revealed 72,000 
additional households at financial risk beyond 
what standard federal affordability data show, 
increasing the anticipated impact of the 
proposed corridor-wide affordable housing 
siting, density and funding flow alignment.  
Finally, the MPO (MRCOG)’s board of regional 
policy-makers committed to increasing transit 
mode share among the Priority Transit Network 
(of which Central is key) to 20 percent of all 
trips by 2040. There is funding attached, with 
25% of all future sub-allocated federal funds to 
be allocated to transit. http://www.mrcog-
nm.gov/images/stories/pdf/transportation/2040_MTP/
2040-mtp-appendix-k-revised-transit-mode-share-
goals.pdf.  
How will the proposed work advance 
transit-oriented development in the 
corridor and region? 
The proposed work would update the City's 
Comprehensive Plan to better coordinate 
land use and transportation and tie TOO­ 
supportive policies to economic 
development goals and implementation 
efforts.  This project would then create a 
UDO that implements multimodal streets 
through updated transportation standards, 
changes zoning along Central Ave and other 
key corridors to encourage TOO, and 
streamlines by-right approvals for transit-
supportive development. If selected for this 
grant, the City will be able to add a 
How will the proposed work advance 
transit-oriented development in the corridor 
and region? 
The proposed work would update the City's 
Comprehensive Plan to better coordinate 
land use and transportation and tie TOD­ 
supportive policies to economic development 
goals and implementation efforts. The ABC-
>Z effort already underway will create an IDO 
that implements multimodal streets through 
updated transportation standards, changes 
zoning along Central Ave and other key 
corridors to encourage TOD, and streamlines 
by-right approvals for transit-supportive 
development. Through this grant, the City will 
be able to add a gentrification study, a 


 
D-15 
gentrification study, a financial tools report 
to encourage TOD implementation, an 
analysis of how to improve access to 
essential services for disadvantaged 
populations, and a comprehensive overhaul 
of policies and regulations governing 
development along this key corridor. Finally, 
the proposed work would include 
coordination with our Metropolitan 
Planning Organization, which has led the 
region's first Scenario Planning effort, 
resulting in a Preferred Scenario that 
dovetails with the City's efforts toward 
compact development along multimodal 
corridors and within key activity centers. 
The Scenario Plan will be part of the region's 
Metropolitan Transportation Plan 
2040,which will prioritize funding for transit 
and other transportation projects to 
implement the Scenario Plan. These 
regional efforts, coupled with the City's BRT 
project for Central and the City's revamp of 
land use regulatory system, will unlock TOD 
development here and elsewhere in the city. 
financial tools report and a construction costs 
report to encourage TOD implementation, an 
analysis of how to improve access to 
essential services for disadvantaged 
populations, and a comprehensive overhaul 
of policies and regulations governing 
development along this key corridor. Finally, 
the proposed work would include 
coordination with our Metropolitan Planning 
Organization, which has led the region's first 
Scenario Planning effort, resulting in a 
Preferred Scenario that dovetails with the 
City's efforts toward compact development 
along multimodal corridors and within key 
activity centers. The Scenario Plan will be 
part of the region's Metropolitan 
Transportation Plan 2040, which will 
prioritize funding for transit and other 
transportation projects to implement the 
Scenario Plan. These regional efforts, coupled 
with the City's BRT project for Central and the 
City's revamp of land use regulatory system, 
will unlock TOD development here and 
elsewhere in the city. 
Why are Pilot Program for Transit-Oriented 
Development Planning funds needed to 
realize the expected outcomes of the 
planning work? 
  
While the City Council has allocated $1.5 
million for our citywide effort, the total 
expected cost of updating the 
Comprehensive Plan and a UDO is $3 
million, based on research of similar efforts 
in other cities. Central Avenue/ Rte. 66 
comprises the most complicated piece of 
the overall puzzle, traveling the full width 
of the City, intersecting multiple low-
income communities, layered with the 
most sector development plans and 
Why are Pilot Program for Transit-Oriented 
Development Planning funds needed to realize 
the expected outcomes of the planning work? 
  
While the City Council has allocated $1.5 million 
for our citywide ABC->Z effort, the total 
expected cost of updating the Comprehensive 
Plan and an IDO is $3 million, based on research 
of similar efforts in other cities. Central 
Avenue/Rte. 66 comprises the most 
complicated piece of the overall puzzle, 
traveling the full width of the City, intersecting 
multiple low-income communities, layered with 
the most sector development plans and overlay 
districts, and representing the greatest 
potential for TOD in the region. The City has the 


 
D-16 
overlay districts, and representing the 
greatest potential for TOD in the region.  
The City has the largest economy in the 
state, but the state itself is ranked 49th in 
poverty, and any significant development 
will have a threat of gentrification 
disproportionately larger than other cities. 
The current funding a !location does not 
cover the planning work itself, much less 
additional studies to assess the threat of 
gentrification and potential remedies or 
financial strategies to incentivize TOD in 
this important corridor. The Central BRT 
project will be considered only in general 
terms without additional funding; this 
grant would ensure a robust, 
comprehensive, and results-based 
approach to incorporate BRT in Comp Plan 
policies and implementation coordination, 
as well as zoning and transportation 
standards within the IDO. The 
gentrification study would provide an 
assessment of the dangers as well as 
effective mitigation measures to be 
implemented immediately and over time 
as the corridor develops. 
largest economy in the state, but the state itself 
is ranked 49th in poverty, and any significant 
development will have a threat of gentrification 
disproportionately larger than other cities. The 
current funding a !location does not cover the 
planning work itself, much less additional 
studies to assess the threat of gentrification 
and potential remedies or creative financial 
strategies to incentivize TOD in this important 
corridor. The Central BRT project will be 
considered only in general terms without 
additional funding. This grant would ensure a 
robust, comprehensive, and results-based 
approach to incorporate BRT in Comp Plan 
policies and implementation coordination, as 
well as zoning and transportation standards 
within the IDO. The gentrification study would 
provide an assessment of the dangers as well as 
effective mitigation measures to be 
implemented immediately and over time as the 
corridor develops. 
 
 
 Provide the approximate current population and employment of the area that the work plan will address: 
Population: 90,751 (36,776 households)  
Employment: 66,512 
 
Describe ongoing transit-oriented development activity in the area that the work plan will address 


 
D-17 
Proposed TOD Projects in Yellow, In Progress TOD Projects in Red above. Highlights include: 
 
De Anza (4301 Central NE): RFP awarded for redevelopment of this historic Rte. 66 motor lodge. 
  
The Carlisle (3600 Central SE): 3-story private development underway. 36 condos, ground-floor retail. 
 
El Vado (2424 Central SW): RFP awarded for mixed-use redevelops of an historic Rte.66 motor  lodge 
with  70 housing units,16,000 SF of commercial, including small business incubator. 
  
Country Club Plaza (Central/Laguna Blvd.):Private mixed-use. 25 housing  units, 6400 SF office, 3600 SF 
restaurant, 9500 SF other uses. 
  
517 Gold SW: Conversion of three-story commercial building to 216 residential units 
  
Imperial Building (205 Silver SW): Private mixed-use development w/ 74 housing units,11,500 SF 
grocery,12,000 SF retail & eateries 
  
Innovate ABQ, a 7-acre core of an Innovation District with over 300,000 project SF of tech office, and 
residential development focused on the leveraging the region’s national comparative advantage in 
scientific research toward new product and firm creation. 
 
Uptown Transit Center – issue an RFP by September 2016 for a potential 5-story mixed-use, possibly 
mixed income, associated development project (with FTA) at the northern terminus of the ART service 
along Louisiana Boulevard from Central Avenue. 
 
 


 
D-18 
Strength of the Work Plan, Schedule and Process 
 
If the proposed work plan does not cover the 
entire transit project corridor – why not? 
  
The proposed work plan covers the entire 
transit  project corridor, including areas where 
transit service will likely be extended in the 
future beyond the current service extents. The 
study area is defined as a half-mile width on 
either side of the transit corridor, which could 
reasonably be expected to draw passengers 
and be impacted by future TOD and transit 
investments.  Major and Community Activity 
Centers (defined in Comp Plan) intersected by 
the corridor are also included in the study 
area. 
If the proposed work plan does not cover the 
entire transit project corridor – why not? 
  
The proposed work plan covers the entire 
transit project corridor, including areas where 
transit service will likely be extended in the 
future beyond the current service extents. The 
study area is defined as a half-mile width on 
either side of the transit corridor, which could 
reasonably be expected to draw passengers 
and be impacted by future TOD and transit 
investments.  Major and Community Activity 
Centers (defined in Comp Plan) intersected by 
the corridor are also included in the study 
area. 
Identify performance measures for the 
proposed planning work: 
· Access to Transit (HH w/in  1/2-mi) 
· Access to Activity Centers (HH 1 m i or 1/4 mi 
transit stop) 
· Access to Bicycle Facilities (HH 1 mi or 1/4 mi 
transit) Jobs w/in  1/2 mi of transit stop 
·   Access to Jobs (HH w/in 1 mi) 
·   Jobs/Housing Mix in Activity Centers 
(Employment  HH in Activity Centers) Housing 
Density & Types (SF v. MF w/in 1/2 mi) 
·   New Land Developed/ Redeveloped (acres in 
1/2 mi) 
·   Vacant Land 
·   Vehicle Hours Traveled (Total driving  time 
for all roadway users during PM peak hour) 
VMT- Vehicle Miles Traveled (total and per 
capita) 
 
·  %  of Network in Congested Conditions (% of 
VMT with V/C > 1.0 during  PM peak hour) 
·  Transit Ridership % increase over base year 
·   Transit Passenger Miles Traveled 
Identify performance measures for the 
proposed planning work: 
· Access to Transit (HH w/in  1/2-mi) 
· Access to Activity Centers (HH 1 m i or 1/4 mi 
transit stop) 
· Access to Bicycle Facilities (HH 1 mi or 1/4 mi 
transit) Jobs w/in  1/2 mi of transit stop 
·   Access to Jobs (HH w/in 1 mi) 
·   Jobs/Housing Mix in Activity Centers 
(Employment  HH in Activity Centers) Housing 
Density & Types (SF v. MF w/in 1/2 mi) 
·   New Land Developed/ Redeveloped (acres in 
1/2 mi) 
·   Vacant Land 
·   Vehicle Hours Traveled (Total driving  time 
for all roadway users during PM peak hour) 
VMT- Vehicle Miles Traveled (total and per 
capita), and Vehicles/HH, VMT/HH/Year, 
transportation options 
·  %  of Network in Congested Conditions (% of 
VMT with V/C > 1.0 during  PM peak hour) 
·  Transit Ridership % increase over base year 
·   Transit Passenger Miles Traveled 


 
D-19 
·   Transit Mode Share 
·   Daily River Crossing Trips (by each mode) 
Average Commute Time (minutes & by mode) 
Crash Incidents (ped, bike,& vehicle) 
·   Access by Income, Disabled, & Age Groups 
(commute time; proximity to jobs, schools, 
grocery, healthcare, rec; transit frequency)  
·   Transit Mode Share 
·   Daily River Crossing Trips (by each mode) 
Average Commute Time (minutes & by mode) 
Crash Incidents (ped, bike,& vehicle) 
·   Access by Income, Disabled, & Age Groups 
(commute time; proximity to jobs, schools, 
grocery, healthcare, rec; transit frequency) 
·   Auto Ownership & Transportation Costs 
·   Because the IDO potentially regulates 
elements of urban form to enforce TOD 
outcomes, measures will also include block 
size, intersection density (connectivity), block 
perimeter maximums, building orientation, mix 
of uses, and expanded housing types and sizes. 
    To measure progress toward the $2 billion 
real estate ROI, we will measure the value of 
property improvements through permits, and 
property value over time.  For the $1 billion in 
savings to households we will use existing 
measures of ridership and transit pass 
distribution and use (frequently at the census 
block group level), and will seek to develop 
further measures that can tie these to 
particular addresses and income levels, to 
identify the benefits to low income persons.  
How will you address possible gentrification 
and displacement as part of the work plan? 
  
-Units of analysis for performance measures- 
by income group /locations to be addressed 
with bus stop adjustments, etc. 
-Substantial neighborhood involvement, focus 
groups for affordable housing providers along 
corridor, and outreach to advocacy 
organizations, non-profits, and  stakeholders 
-Comp Plan update to housing policies, goals, 
and projects, including coordination with land 
use, transportation, and economic 
development goals and policies, as well as 
implementation tools and priorities 
How will you address possible gentrification 
and displacement as part of the work plan? 
  
-Units of analysis for performance measures- 
by income group /locations to be addressed 
with bus stop adjustments, etc. 
-Substantial neighborhood involvement, focus 
groups for affordable housing providers along 
corridor, and outreach to advocacy 
organizations, non-profits, and  stakeholders 
-Comp Plan update to housing policies, goals, 
and projects, including coordination with land 
use, transportation, and economic 
development goals and policies, as well as 
implementation tools and priorities 


 
D-20 
-Coordination with the New Mexico Mortgage 
Finance Authority, City Family & Community 
Services Department, City Senior Affairs 
Department, and the independent Housing 
Authority 
-Incentives for affordable housing as part of a 
density bonus along corridor 
-More development by-right  along the 
corridor (increases areas viable for affordable 
housing  projects) 
-Potential for regulations, incentives, and 
partnerships for incubator spaces for local 
entrepreneurs in new developments (i.e. save 
spaces for local small business startups so that 
residents can increase their incomes and afford 
to remain living nearby.) 
-Coordination with the New Mexico Mortgage 
Finance Authority, City Family & Community 
Services Department, City Senior Affairs 
Department, and the independent Housing 
Authority 
-Incentives for affordable housing as part of a 
density bonus along corridor 
-More development by-right along the corridor 
(increases areas viable for affordable housing  
projects) 
-Potential for regulations, incentives, and 
partnerships for incubator spaces for local 
entrepreneurs in new developments or shared 
workspace (i.e. save spaces for local small 
business startups so that residents can 
increase their incomes and afford to remain 
living nearby.) 
How does the work plan demonstrate a 
commitment to connecting disadvantaged  
populations to essential services? 
  
Many disadvantaged families are either single-
car households or zero-car households.  
lncreasing the viability of TOD along the 
corridor, coupled with savvy affordable 
housing planning, will help provide access to 
jobs, services, healthcare, and recreation along 
the corridor and throughout the city via more 
viable alternative  transportation. As Central is 
already the best-used transit corridor in the 
City and houses the Alvarado Transit Station, 
which connects every bus line in town. 
Development along the transit corridor  helps 
support and enhance BRT service and 
reinforces the overall transit system, which in 
turn determines how much of the City can be 
accessed via transit, biking, and walking. The 
Central Ave corridor is already a key connector  
of low-income communities to the biggest 
regional hospital­ Presbyterian at Central and 
How does the work plan demonstrate a 
commitment to connecting disadvantaged 
populations to essential services? 
  
Many disadvantaged families are either single-
car households or zero-car households. 
lncreasing the viability of TOD along the 
corridor, coupled with savvy affordable 
housing planning, will help provide access to 
jobs, services, healthcare, and recreation along 
the corridor and throughout the city via more 
viable alternative  transportation. Central is 
already the best-used transit corridor in the 
City and houses the Alvarado Transit Station, 
which connects every bus line in town. 
Development along the transit corridor  helps 
support and enhance BRT service and 
reinforces the overall transit system, which in 
turn determines how much of the City can be 
accessed via transit, biking, and walking. The 
Central Ave corridor is already a key connector  
of low-income communities to the biggest 
regional hospital­ Presbyterian at Central and 


 
D-21 
Sycamore- and smaller community clinics to 
the east near San Mateo and to the west at 
Unser Blvd,as well as government and social 
services downtown. 
Sycamore- and smaller community clinics to 
the east near San Mateo and to the west at 
Unser Blvd, as well as government and social 
services downtown. 
 
 
Will the proposed planning work leverage other discretionary Federal planning grants that have already 
been awarded?  
 
 
√ Yes      No     If so, please describe how: 
The City has a grant directly related to the Analysis, Study, and Implementation of a BRT (FTA grant 
number  NM 03 0025). Now that the City has committed to the Central Avenue BRT project, work 
performed  as part of the Pilot TOD Planning Grant can help to leverage the initial grant to explore 
and implement a successful transit project in coordination with transit-supportive and transit-
oriented development and larger multimodal network, especially infrastructure needs for bike/ped 
accessibility. 
 
The City also has a grant for the Uptown Transit Center (Federal grant number Grant NM-03-0021). 
Since the BRT route includes service to this Uptown Transit Center, the envisioned mixed use 
joint/ancillary development at the Uptown site will be augmented by this proposed TOD planning 
grant’s focus on improving the pedestrian environment and connections to the region’s premier office 
and shopping center, ABQ Uptown. 
 
 


 
D-22 
 Likelihood of Transit Project Implementation 
 
Is the transit project currently in the Project Development or Engineering phase of the Capital 
Investment Grant Program (CIGP) process?               √ Yes     
No 
  
If not,indicate the expected project mode, the project  length and number  of stations, the date that 
NEPA was initiated for the project and the anticipated date of entry into Project Development: 
  
Is the transit project currently listed in the region's metropolitan transportation plan? 
√Yes       
No 
  
If so, provide the URL of the plan document and indicate wherein the plan (project ID or page number)  
the project  appears: 
  
The project is included in the most recent Unified Planning Work Program for Federal Fiscal Years 2015 
& 2016, listed as project 5.6, page 34.  
http://www.mrcog-nm.gov/transportation/unified-planning-work-program 
This same project number and description are also listed in the draft 2017 & 2018 UPWP, to be 
approved by the MPO board in July.  ABQ Ride has been submitting quarterly reports to the MPO since 
inclusion in the UPWP. 
  
 
Funding Commitments 
 
Identify the sources of all matching funds. For 
each source, indicate whether the funds are 
already committed. Attach documentation 
of all funding commitments to your SF424 app: 
City of Albuquerque- $1.5 million committed 
for Comp Plan Update+ Unified Development 
Ordinance- citywide. TOD planning for Central 
is assumed to make up 35% of the workload. 
The gentrification report, financial tools report, 
and infrastructure report to improve 
pedestrian and bicycle access to and within the 
corridor are assumed to be specific to the TOD 
project and budgeted at 1OO % of their total 
projected cost ($550,000).The total City match 
is more than covered with the committed 
funds. 
Identify the sources of all matching funds. For 
each source, indicate whether the funds are 
already committed. Attach documentation 
of all funding commitments to your SF424 app: 
City of Albuquerque - $215,000 earmarked 
(submitted to, but pending final City Council 
approval NLT June 20) and to be committed as 
the required 20% local match. As described in 
the original proposal, the city also committed 
$1.5 million for the Comp Plan Update and IDO 
(for which the Central Corridor represents 
35%of its workload), but due to the timing of 
the award notification, these significant 
planning funds no longer are eligible as match. 
Further, beyond this grant’s current match 
pledge, in FY 2106 Central Avenue corridor 


 
D-23 
  
planning funds have been expended prior to 
the grant award notice, including $40,000 for 
four Transit and Development workshops 
engaging over 200 residents, business and 
community leaders, and $65,000 for the CNT 
study that identified the $2 and $1 billion real 
estate and community ROI. Over $150,000 was 
spent on place-based CBO development 
partners and a market analyses for prospective 
development. Though the grant timing allowed 
none of these expenditures to serve as a 
match, they do demonstrate a substantial 
commitment to TOD and all advance the state 
of the effort involved in the workplace toward 
our ultimate goals. In the FY 2017 budget, the 
Economic Development Department also has 
$175,000 earmarked for small business 
outreach, TA and business planning. 
 


A-1 
Appendix A  
Cost Proposal Form 
 
Task 1 (As defined by Offeror): 
 
 
 
Any sub tasks (As defined by Offeror): 
 
 
 
 
Personnel assigned to task (or sub task) 
Fully loaded hourly rate 
# of Hours for sub task 
Total Hours 
Total Cost 
1 
  
  
  
  
  
2, etc   
  
  
  
  
 
Expenses by Task (list, if any) 
  
  
  
  
 
Task 1 Total 
  
  
  
  
Task 2 (As defined by Offeror): 
Any sub tasks (As defined by Offeror): 
 
 
 
 
Personnel assigned to task (or sub task) 
Fully loaded hourly rate 
# of Hours for sub task 
Total Hours 
Total Cost 
1 
  
  
  
  
  
2, etc   
  
  
  
  
 
Expenses by Task  (list, if any) 
  
  
  
  
 
Task 2 Total 
  
  
  
  
Additional Tasks (as defined by Offeror)—Please follow same format as delineated in Tasks 1 and 2 above: 
Other Expenses (Travel, lodging and other direct expenses) 
1 
  
  
  
  
2, etc   
  
  
  
  
Total Other Expenses 
  
  
Grand Total 
  
 
 
_______ % of this grand total is to be fulfilled by DBE Firm(s) (See Appendix C #28, on page 33) 


B-1 
 
 
Appendix B 
 
Federal Requirements and Forms 
 
Federal Transit Administration 
Required Contract Clauses and Certifications 
 
1. 
Fly America. The Contractor shall comply with 49 U.S.C. 40118 (The  “Fly 
America” Act) in accordance with the General Services Administration’s regulations at 41 
GFR Part 301-10, which provide the recipients and sub-recipients of federal funds and their 
Contractors are required to use U.S. Flag air carriers for U.S. Government financed 
international air travel and transportation of their personal effects or property, to the extent 
such service is available, unless traveled by a foreign air carrier is a matter of necessity, as 
defined by the Fly America Act. The Contractor shall submit, if a foreign air carrier is used, 
an appropriate certification or memorandum adequately explaining why service by a U.S. 
Flag air carrier was not available or why it was necessary to use a foreign air carrier and 
shall, in any event, provide certificate of compliance with the Fly America requirements. The 
Contractor agrees to include the requirements of this section in all subcontracts that may 
involve international air transportation. 
  
2. 
Buy America - N/A 
 
3. 
Charter Bus and School Bus -  N/A 
 
4. 
Cargo Preference – Required for transportation of materials by ocean vessels -
 N/A 
 
5. 
Seismic Safety. N/A 
 
6. 
Energy Conservation Measures. The Contractor agrees to comply with mandatory 
standards and policies relating to energy efficiency that are contained in the state energy 
conservation plan issued in compliance with the Energy Policy and Conservation Act.  
 
7. 
Clean Water Requirements. The Contractor agrees to comply with all applicable 
standards, orders or regulations issued pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 
as amended, 33 U.S.C 1251 et seq. The Contractor agrees to report each violation to the 
Owner and understands and agrees that the Owner will, in turn, report each violation as 
required to assure notification to FTA and appropriate EPA Regional Office. The Contractor 
also agrees to include these requirements in each subcontract financed in whole or in part 
with Federal assistance provided by FTA.  
 
8. 
Bus Testing Certification – See Certifications -  N/A 
 
9. 
Pre-Award and Post Delivery Audit & Certification– See Certifications – N/A 
 


B-2 
 
10. 
Lobbying - Prohibition Against Use of Funds for Lobbying.  Neither the Contractor 
nor any subcontractor may use Federal assistance funds for publicity or propaganda purposes 
designed to support or defeat legislation pending before Congress. Certification of 
Restrictions on Lobbying is required with all bids or offers on FTA funded contracts.  
 
Clause and specific language therein are mandated by 49 CFR Part 19, Appendix A.  
Modifications have been made to the Clause pursuant to Section 10 of the Lobbying 
Disclosure Act of 1995, P.L. 104-65 [to be codified at 2 U.S.C. § 1601, et seq.] 
- Lobbying Certification and Disclosure of Lobbying Activities for third party contractors 
are mandated by 31 U.S.C. 1352(b)(5), as amended by Section 10 of the Lobbying 
Disclosure Act of 1995, and DOT implementing regulation, "New Restrictions on 
Lobbying," at 49 CFR § 20.110(d) 
- Language in Lobbying Certification is mandated by 49 CFR Part 19, Appendix A, Section 
7, which provides that contractors file the certification required by 49 CFR Part 20, 
Appendix A. 
Modifications have been made to the Lobbying Certification pursuant to Section 10 of the 
Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995. 
- Use of "Disclosure of Lobbying Activities," Standard Form-LLL set forth in Appendix B 
of 49 CFR Part 20, as amended by "Government wide Guidance For New Restrictions on 
Lobbying," 61 Fed. Reg. 1413 (1/19/96) is mandated by 49 CFR Part 20, Appendix A. 
Contractors who apply or bid for an award of $100,000 or more shall file the certification 
required by 49 CFR part 20, "New Restrictions on Lobbying." Each tier certifies to the tier 
above that it will not and has not used Federal appropriated funds to pay any person or 
organization for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any 
agency, a member of Congress, officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a 
member of Congress in connection with obtaining any Federal contract, grant or any other 
award covered by 31 U.S.C. 1352. Each tier shall also disclose the name of any registrant 
under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 who has made lobbying contacts on its behalf 
with non-Federal funds with respect to that Federal contract, grant or award covered by 31 
U.S.C. 1352. Such disclosures are forwarded from tier to tier up to the recipient. 
 
11. 
Access to Records and Reports. The Contractor shall comply with requirements of 
49 U.S.C. 5325 18 CFR 18.36 (i) 49 CFR 633.17. The Contractor agrees to provide the City, 
the FTA Administrator, the Comptroller General of the United States or any of their 
authorized representatives access to any books, documents, papers and records of the 
Contractor which are directly pertinent to this contract for the purposes of making audits, 
examinations, excerpts and transcriptions. 
 
The following access to records requirements apply to this Contract:  
 
a. 
Where the Purchaser is not a State but a local government and is the FTA 
Recipient or a subgrantee of the FTA Recipient in accordance with 49 C. F. R. 18.36(i), the 
Contractor agrees to provide the Purchaser, the FTA Administrator, the Comptroller General 
of the United States or any of their authorized representatives access to any books, 
documents, papers and records of the Contractor which are directly pertinent to this contract 
for the purposes of making audits, examinations, excerpts and transcriptions. Contractor also 


B-3 
 
agrees, pursuant to 49 C. F. R. 633.17 to provide the FTA Administrator or his authorized 
representatives including any PMO Contractor access to Contractor's records and 
construction sites pertaining to a major capital project, defined at 49 U.S.C. 5302(a)1, which 
is receiving federal financial assistance through the programs described at 49 U.S.C. 5307, 
5309 or 5311. 
 
b. 
Where the Purchaser is a State and is the FTA Recipient or a subgrantee of the 
FTA Recipient in accordance with 49 C.F.R. 633.17, Contractor agrees to provide the 
Purchaser, the FTA Administrator or his authorized representatives, including any PMO 
Contractor, access to the Contractor's records and construction sites pertaining to a major 
capital project, defined at 49 U.S.C. 5302(a)1, which is receiving federal financial assistance 
through the programs described at 49 U.S.C. 5307, 5309 or 5311. By definition, a major 
capital project excludes contracts of less than the simplified acquisition threshold currently 
set at $100,000. 
 
c. 
Where the Purchaser enters into a negotiated contract for other than a small 
purchase or under the simplified acquisition threshold and is an institution of higher 
education, a hospital or other non-profit organization and is the FTA Recipient or a 
subgrantee of the FTA Recipient in accordance with 49 C.F.R. 19.48, Contractor agrees to 
provide the Purchaser, FTA Administrator, the Comptroller General of the United States or 
any of their duly authorized representatives with access to any books, documents, papers and 
record of the Contractor which are directly pertinent to this contract for the purposes of 
making audits, examinations, excerpts and transcriptions. 
 
d. 
Where any Purchaser which is the FTA Recipient or a subgrantee of the FTA 
Recipient in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 5325(a) enters into a contract for a capital project or 
improvement (defined at 49 U.S.C. 5302(a)1) through other than competitive bidding, the 
Contractor shall make available records related to the contract to the Purchaser, the Secretary 
of Transportation and the Comptroller General or any authorized officer or employee of any 
of them for the purposes of conducting an audit and inspection. 
 
e. 
The Contractor agrees to permit any of the foregoing parties to reproduce by any 
means whatsoever or to copy excerpts and transcriptions as reasonably needed. 
 
f. 
The Contractor agrees to maintain all books, records, accounts and reports 
required under this contract for a period of not less than three years after the date of 
termination or expiration of this contract, except in the event of litigation or settlement of 
claims arising from the performance of this contract, in which case Contractor agrees to 
maintain same until the Purchaser, the FTA Administrator, the Comptroller General, or any 
of their duly authorized representatives, have disposed of all such litigation, appeals, claims 
or exceptions related thereto. Reference 49 CFR 18.39(i)(11). 
 
g. 
FTA does not require the inclusion of these requirements in subcontracts.  
 


B-4 
 
Requirements for Access to Records and Reports by Types of Contract 
 
Contract 
Characteristics 
Operational 
Service 
Contract 
Turnkey 
Architectural 
Engineering 
Professional 
Services 
I State Grantees 
 
 
a. Contracts 
below SAT 
($100,000)  
b. Contracts 
above 
$100,000/Capital 
Projects 
None 
None 
unless1 
non-
competitive 
award 
Those 
imposed 
on state 
pass thru 
to 
Contractor 
None 
None unless 
non-
competitive 
award 
None 
None unless 
non-
competitive 
award 
II Non State 
Grantees  
a. Contracts 
below SAT 
($100,000)  
b. Contracts 
above 
$100,000/Capital 
Projects  
Yes3 
Yes3 
Those 
imposed 
on non-
state 
Grantee 
pass thru 
to 
Contractor 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. 
Federal Changes. Contractors shall at all times comply with all applicable FTA 
regulations, policies, procedures and directives, including without limitation those listed 
directly or by reference in the Agreement (Form FTA MA (4) dated October, 1997) between 
the City of Albuquerque and FTA, as they may be amended or promulgated from time to 
time during the term of this Agreement.  Contractor’s failure to so comply shall constitute a 
material breach of this Agreement. 
 
13. 
Bonding Requirements : N/A 
 
14. 
Clean Air. The Contractor agrees to comply with all applicable standards, orders or 
regulations issued pursuant to the Clean Air Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq. The 
Contractor agrees to report each violation to the Owner and understands and agrees that the 
Owner will, in turn, report each violation as required to assure notification to FTA and 
appropriate EPA Regional Office.  
 
15. 
Recycled Products. N/A 


B-5 
 
 
16. 
Davis Bacon/Copeland Anti-Kickback N/A 
 
17. 
Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards N/A 
 
18. 
Reserved for FTA - None 
 
19. 
No Government Obligations to Third Parties. The Contractor and the Owner 
acknowledge and agree that, notwithstanding any concurrence by the Federal Government in 
or approval of the solicitation or award of the underlying contract, absent the express written 
consent by the Federal Government, the Federal Government is not a party to this contract 
and shall not be subject to any obligations or liabilities to the Owner, Contractor, or any other 
party (whether or not a party to that contract) pertaining to any matter resulting from the 
underlying contract. The Contractor agrees to include the above clause in each subcontract 
financed in whole or in part with Federal assistance provided by FTA. It is further agreed that 
the clause shall not be modified, except to identify the subcontractor who will be subject to 
its provisions. 
 
20. 
Program Fraud and False or Fraudulent Statements and Related Acts.   The 
Contractor acknowledges that the provisions of the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 
1986, as amended, 31 U.S.C. § 3801 et seq. and U.S. DOT regulations, "Program Fraud Civil 
Remedies," 49 C.F.R. Part 31, apply to its actions pertaining to this Project. Upon execution 
of the underlying contract, the Contractor certifies or affirms the truthfulness and accuracy of 
any statement it has made, it makes, it may make, or causes to be made, pertaining to the 
underlying contract or the FTA assisted project for which this contract work is being 
performed. In addition to other penalties that may be applicable, the Contractor further 
acknowledges that if it makes, or causes to be made, a false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim, 
statement, submission, or certification, the Federal Government reserves the right to impose 
the penalties of the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 1986 on the Contractor to the 
extent the Federal Government deems appropriate. The Contractor agrees to include the 
above two clauses in each subcontract finance in whole or in part with Federal assistance 
provided by the FTA. It is further agreed that the clause shall not be modified, except to 
identify the subcontractor who will be subject to its provisions. 
 
21. 
Termination (Included in CONTRACT) 
 
22. 
Debarment and Suspension. This contract is a covered transaction for purposed 
of 49 CFR Part 29. As such, the Contractor is required to verify that none of the contractor, 
its principals, as defined in 49 CFR 29.995, or affiliates, as defined at 49 CFR 29.905, are 
excluded or disqualified as defined at 49 CFR 29.940 and 29.945. The Contractor is required 
to comply with 49 CFR 29, Subpart C and must include the requirement to comply with 49 
CFR 29, Subpart C in any lower tier covered transaction it enters into. The Contractor shall 
provide certifications required by the Department of Transportation regulations, 
“Government-wide Debarment and Suspension”, 40 C.F.R Part 29, and otherwise comply 
with the requirements of those regulations. Certification is required. 
 


B-6 
 
23. 
Privacy Act  
 
The following requirements apply to the Contractor and its employees that administer any 
system of records on behalf of the Federal Government under any contract:  
(1) The Contractor agrees to comply with, and assures the compliance of its employees with, 
the information restrictions and other applicable requirements of the Privacy Act of 
1974,  
 
5 U.S.C. § 552a. Among other things, the Contractor agrees to obtain the express 
consent of the Federal Government before the Contractor or its employees operate a 
system of records on behalf of the Federal Government. The Contractor understands that 
the requirements of the Privacy Act, including the civil and criminal penalties for 
violation of that Act, apply to those individuals involved, and that failure to comply with 
the terms of the Privacy Act may result in termination of the underlying contract. 
(2) The Contractor also agrees to include these requirements in each subcontract to 
administer any system of records on behalf of the Federal Government financed in whole 
or in part with Federal assistance provided by FTA. 
 
24. 
Civil Rights Compliance.   
a. Nondiscrimination – In accordance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, as 
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d, section 3030 of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as 
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 6102, section 202 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 
U.S.C. § 12132, and Federal transit law at 49 U.S.C. § 5332, the Contractor agrees that it will 
not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, 
creed, national origin, sex, age, or disability. In addition the Contractor agrees to comply 
with applicable Federal implementing regulations and other implementing requirements FTA 
may issue.    
b. Equal Employment Opportunity – The following equal employment opportunity 
requirements may apply to the underlying contract: Race, Color, Creed, National Origin, Sex 
– In accordance with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e, and 
Federal transit laws at 49 U.S.C. § 5332, the Contractor agrees to comply with all applicable 
equal employment opportunity requirements of the U.S. Department of Labor (U.S. DOL) 
regulations, “Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment 
Opportunity, Department of Labor”, 41 C.F.R. Parts 60 et seq., (which implement Executive 
Order No. 11246, “Equal Employment Opportunity”, as amended by Executive Order No 
11375, “Amending Executive Order 11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity”, 42 
U.S.C. § 2000e note), and with any applicable Federal statutes, executive orders, regulations, 
and Federal policies that may in the future affect construction activities undertaken in the 
course of a Project. The Contractor agrees to take affirmative action to ensure that applicants 
are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their 
race, color, creed, national origin, sex, or age. Such action shall include but not be limited to, 
the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer, recruitment or recruitment 
advertising, layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection 
for training, including apprenticeship. In addition the Contractor agrees to comply with any 
implementing requirements FTA may issue.  
c. Age – In accordance with section 4 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act 
of 1967, as amended, 29 U.S.C. §§ 623 and Federal transit law at 49 U.S.C. § 5332, the 


B-7 
 
Contractor agrees to refrain from discrimination against present and prospective employees 
for reason of age. In addition the Contractor agrees to comply with any implementing 
requirements FTA may issue.  
d. Disabilities – In accordance with section 102 of the Americans with Disabilities 
Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 12112, the Contractor agrees that it will comply with the 
requirements of U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Regulations to 
Implement the Equal Employment Provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act”, 29 
C.F.R. Part 1630, pertaining to employment of persons with disabilities. In addition, the 
Contractor agrees to comply with any implementing requirements FTA may issue. The 
Contractor further agrees to include these requirements in each contract financed in whole or 
in part with Federal assistance provided by FTA, modified only if necessary to identify the 
affected parties.  
 
25. 
Breaches and Dispute Resolution - Disputes arising in the performance of this 
Contract which are not resolved by agreement of the parties shall be decided in writing by the 
authorized representative of Recipient's Department of Economic Development. This 
decision shall be final and conclusive unless within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of 
its copy, the Contractor mails or otherwise furnishes a written appeal to the Deputy Director 
of Economic Development. In connection with any such appeal, the Contractor shall be 
afforded an opportunity to be heard and to offer evidence in support of its position. The 
decision of the Deputy Director of the Recipient’s Economic Development Department shall 
be binding upon the Contractor and the Contractor shall abide be the decision. 
 
26. 
Patient and Rights Data – N/A 
 
27. 
Transit Employee Protective Agreements– N/A 
 
28. 
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise. This contract is subject to the requirements of 
Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 26, Participation by Disadvantaged Business 
Enterprises in Department of Transportation Financial Assistance Programs.  
 
The national goal for participation of Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) is 10%. The 
City’s overall goal for certified DBE participation is 5.56%. A list of certified Disadvantaged 
Business Enterprises can be obtained from the New Mexico State Highway and 
Transportation Department, Office of Equal Employment Opportunity Programs, P.O. Box 
1148, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-1148. A separate contract goal of 5.6 % DBE has not 
been established for this procurement.  
 
a. The Contractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, 
or sex in the performance of this contract. The Contractor shall carry out this DOT-assisted 
contract. Failure by the Contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this 
contract, which may result in the termination of this contract, or such other remedy as 
deemed appropriate. Each subcontract the Contractor signs with a subcontractor must include 
the assurance in the paragraph (see 49 CFR 26.13 (b)). 
b. The Contractor will be required to report its DBE participation obtained through 
race-neutral means throughout the period of performance.  


B-8 
 
 
c. The Contractor is required to pay its subcontractors performing work related to 
this contract for satisfactory performance of that work no later than 30 days after the 
Contractor’s receipt of payment for that work. In addition, the Contractor may not withhold 
retainage from its subcontractors.  
 
d. The Contractor must promptly notify the City whenever a DBE subcontractor 
performing work related to this contract is terminated or fails to complete its work, and must 
make good faith efforts to engage another DBE subcontractor to perform at least the same 
amount of work. The Contractor may not terminate any DBE subcontractor and perform that 
work through its own forces or those of an affiliate without prior written consent of the City.  
 
29. 
FTA Reserved – NONE 
 
30. 
Incorporation of Federal Transit Administration (FTA) Terms. All contractual 
provisions required by U.S. Department of Transportation, as set forth in FTA Circular 
4220.1E, and subsequent amendments are hereby incorporated by reference.  Anything to the 
contrary herein notwithstanding, all FTA mandated terms shall deemed to control in the 
event of a conflict with other provisions contained in this Contract. The Contractor shall not 
perform any act, fail to perform any act, or refuse to comply with any request, which would 
cause the City of Albuquerque to be in violation of FTA terms and conditions. 
 
31. 
Drug and Alcohol Testing  N/A


B-9 
 
CERTIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS ON LOBBYING 
 
 
I, ______________________________________, hereby certify on behalf of  
                (Name and title of Official)  
 
__________________________________________________________ that;  
                                            (Name of Firm)  
 
(1) 
No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the 
undersigned person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of an 
agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee or Member 
of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal 
grant, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the 
extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, 
loan or cooperative agreement.  
 
(2) 
If any funds other the Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any 
person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a 
member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of 
Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement, the 
undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report 
Lobbying”, in accordance with its instructions.  
 
(3) 
The undersigned shall require that the language of this certification be included in the 
award documents for all sub-awards at all tiers (including subcontracts, sub-grants, and contracts 
under grants, loans and cooperative agreements) and that all sub-recipients shall certify and 
disclose accordingly.  
 
For purposes of this Certification, the Agreement shall be considered a federal contract. This 
certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance is placed when this 
transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is prerequisite for making 
or entering into this transaction imposed by Section 1352, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to 
file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not 
more than $100,000 for each such failure.  
 
Executed this ________ day of ______________________, 20____.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
By 
 
___________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Signature of authorized official) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Title of authorized official)  
 
 
 


B-10 
 
CERTIFICATION REGARDING DEBARMENT, SUSPENSION, AND OTHER 
RESPONSIBILITY MATTERS – PRIMARY COVERED TRANSACTIONS 
 
 
The _______________________________, certifies to the best of its knowledge and  
                         (Contractor)  
belief, that it and its principals: 
 
(1) 
Are not presently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, declared  
ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from covered transactions by any Federal department or 
agency;  
 
(2) 
Have not within a three-year period preceding this contract been convicted or  
had a civil judgment against them for commission or fraud or a criminal offense in 
connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public (Federal, State or 
Local) transaction or contract under a public transaction; violation of Federal or State 
antitrust statutes or commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or 
destruction of records, making false statements or receiving stolen property;  
 
(3) 
Are not presently indicted for or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a  
governmental entity (Federal, State or Local) with commission of any of the offenses 
enumerated in paragraph (2) of this certification; and 
 
(4) 
Have not within a three-year period preceding this agreement had one or more  
public transactions (Federal, State or Local) terminated for cause or default.  
 
Where the Contractor is unable to certify to any of the statements in this certification, such 
Contractor shall attach an explanation to this certification.  
 
THE CONTRACTOR, ___________________________________ CERTIFIES OR AFFIRMS 
THE TRUTHFULNESS AND ACCURACY OF THE CONTENTS OF THE STATEMENTS 
SUBMITTED ON OR WITH THIS CERTIFICATION AND UNDERSTANDS THAT THE 
PROVISIONS OF 31 U.S.C. sub-section 3801 ET SEQ. ARE APPLICABLE THERETO.  
 
Executed this ________ day of _____________________, 20____.  
 
By 
 
___________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Signature of authorized official) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title of authorized official) 
 


C-1 
 
Appendix C 
 
Study by Center for Neighborhood Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
The Scale of the Prize  
 
 
An Analysis of Potential Development in the Albuquerque Rapid Transit Corridor  
Based on Comparisons with Development Achieved Nationally  
in Transit Station Areas and Corridors  
 
 
Prepared by the Center for Neighborhood Technology  
 
 
For the Government of the City of Albuquerque  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact:  
David Chandler  
Principal Business Analyst  
Center for Neighborhood Technology  
david@cnt.org  
773-269-4023  
2125 W North Avenue  
Chicago, IL  60647  


C-2 
 
Contents 
 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 3 
I.  Albuquerque’s Need and Opportunity for Transit-Oriented Development ............................................. 6 
A. 
Coordinating Land Use and Transportation ...................................................................................... 6 
B. 
Economic Growth and Changing Preferences .................................................................................. 9 
C. 
Capitalizing on Assets, Realizing Plans ............................................................................................ 10 
D. 
Integrating Redevelopment Efforts and Zoning.............................................................................. 11 
1. 
Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas .......................................................................................... 11 
2. 
  Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) ................................................................................ 12 
E. 
Early Albuquerque Market Developments ..................................................................................... 13 
F. 
True Rapid Transit ........................................................................................................................... 13 
G. 
Matching Comparable Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Projects in Other Cities ........................................ 15 
1. 
      BRT Investments in Comparable Cities .................................................................................. 15 
2. 
  Early Outcomes from BRT Investments in Comparable Cities .................................................. 18 
3. 
   Similarities in BRT Research Findings ....................................................................................... 21 
II. Comparative Analysis of Albuquerque’s Transit-Oriented Development Opportunity .......................... 22 
A. 
The Typology of Station Areas ........................................................................................................ 22 
B. 
Key Comparisons and Assumptions ................................................................................................ 23 
C. 
Calculations of Potential Development Scale ................................................................................. 28 
1. 
Downtown District ...................................................................................................................... 28 
2. 
Urban Neighborhood District ...................................................................................................... 31 
3. 
Town Center District ................................................................................................................... 34 
III. Findings and Recommendations ............................................................................................................ 37 
A. 
Findings ........................................................................................................................................... 37 
1. 
Discussion of Findings ................................................................................................................. 37 
2. 
Summary of Findings ................................................................................................................... 39 
B.  Recommendations ............................................................................................................................. 40 
 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-3 
 
Executive Summary    
 
Albuquerque’s planning agencies and civic leaders have long recognized a need to invest in public 
transportation that will drive adjustments in the region’s land use patterns in order to ameliorate traffic 
congestion, improve air quality, increase the region’s attraction to skilled professionals and innovative 
firms, increase workers’ access to jobs and residents’ access to services that can improve health and 
quality of life. Other regions around nation have invested in fixed guideway transit systems in order to 
achieve similar goals.  
 
The proposed Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART) is a bus rapid transit (BRT) system that will incorporate 
virtually all of the features that transit-oriented development studies, including BRT research, have 
shown are characteristic of transit systems that meet regional goals, particularly for economic 
development:  
• 
The technical features of the ART – including its permanent stations, pre-boarding fare system, 
dedicated lanes, signal priority, and service schedule -- ensure speed, reliability, and 
convenience for its customers.  
• 
The ART route -- virtually the entire length of Central Avenue -- connects relatively dense 
residential neighborhoods to centers of employment, vital services, and entertainment.  
• 
In combination the ART’s technical characteristics and route will provide reliable 
accessibility to other transit services, including multiple north-south bus routes.  
• 
The ART will make a basic contribution to numerous local government and institutional 
plans to revitalize Albuquerque’s economy and protect its environment, including the 
Preferred Scenario of the regional Long Range Transportation Plan, the expansion of the 
UNM Hospital and campus, ABQ the Plan, Innovate ABQ, STC.UNM (UNM technology transfer 
non-profit organization), the Downtown ABQ Mainstreet Initiative and the Downtown 2025 
Sector Development Plan.  
• 
The private market has shown its readiness to invest in the ART corridor through some 17 
mixed-use, multifamily building, or commercial projects that have been built in this corridor 
within the last three years, with at least 12 additional projects proposed. Several developers of 
these projects have expressed their expectation that the ART will make an important 
contribution to the success of their investments.  
 
In light of these facts, the Center for Neighborhood Technology (CNT) conservatively projects that the 
ART will stimulate the redevelopment of 80% of the vacant or severely under-utilized real estate parcels 
within a 5/8 mile radius of its Central Avenue route. In this projection CNT anticipates that the type of 
uses to which these properties will be redeveloped will mirror current land use in the same station 
areas. CNT also expects and that the level of intensity to which these properties will be redeveloped will 
correspond to the middle range of intensity for fixed guideway transit station areas with these types of 
land use, per data on hundreds of station areas analyzed by the Center for Transit Oriented 
Development. These projected developments could occur over period as brief as 10 or as long as 20 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-4 
 
years, depending largely on local government decisions regarding the implementation of the ART. The 
results of these projections are summarized on the following table.  
 
                  Summary of Projected New Development Linked to Implementation of the ART  
Station Areas 
Assessed Value 
Residents 
Residential 
Units 
Office 
Jobs  
Retail 
Jobs 
Development Value 
Downtown  
 $        197,359,099  
           
2,169  
            
1,146  
     
5,108  
       
1,664  
 $                917,219,750  
Urban 
Neighborhoods 
 $          54,870,890  
           
3,003  
            
1,444  
        
573  
   502  
 $                331,424,286  
Town Center  
 $        166,421,934  
         
12,263  
            
4,690  
        
432  
       
1,313  
 $             1,683,798,595  
Total 
 $        418,646,923  
         
17,435  
            
7,280  
     
6,113  
       
3,479  
 $             2,932,442,631  
 
According to data from the Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP), the projected 
value of development to be stimulated by the ART is in the midrange of development linked to similar 
new transit systems, including BRT, in comparable cities. It is less than the developments triggered by 
new transit in Cleveland, Kansas City, and Portland; larger than the transit corridor developments built 
to date in Las Vegas, Pittsburg, and Charlotte; about the same as developments launched in Seattle and 
Phoenix.  
 
CNT’s projections may also be compared to estimates of development to be spurred by the ART at 64 
locations in the middle of the Central Avenue corridor (Downtown and some Urban Neighborhood 
station areas) that were presented by members of the Albuquerque chapter of the National Association 
of Industrial and Office Properties (NAIOP) in 2014. CNT’s estimates of overall development value, which 
considered entire station areas rather than just selected sites, where approximately 20% higher than 
those of the NAIOP members for the same portions of the ART corridor. CNT also projected higher levels 
of commercial development and job creation and lower levels of residential development than the 
NAIOP estimates. While CNT’s projections are more reflective of the most recent data on station area 
development, NAIOP members’ projections of higher levels of downtown housing are in line with 
emerging trends that may not yet be evident in data on the built environments of station areas.     
 
Two observations on the development that may be anticipated in the ART corridor drive CNT’s 
recommendations related to public policy for the implementation of this transit system:  
• 
First, while the scale of development projected for the ART corridor is substantial, it amounts to less 
than 30% of the station area development that the Middle Region Council of Governments (MRCOG) 
has projected is necessary to realize the Preferred Scenario of the Albuquerque Region’s Long Range 
Transportation Plan – the scenario that will relieve traffic congestion, improve air quality, and 
provide the basis for a growing economy in this metropolitan area.   
• 
Second, the characteristics of the proposed ART that make high estimates of its development 
potential appropriate – its technical and service features, the economic vitality of its route, and its 
synergy with a range of critical development initiatives -- are interdependent.  The high quality of 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-5 
 
transit service offered by the ART is necessary to create a significant asset on Central Avenue. At this 
time, deploying such a large transit investment on any other Albuquerque route or a mere portion 
of Central Avenue would amount to ignoring the region’s principal development assets. The well-
documented relationship between quality transit service and an urban environment that attracts 
the workers and firms of a knowledge-based economy makes public support for the ART and 
initiatives such as Innovate ABQ and expansion of the University of New Mexico two sides of a coin.  
 
Accordingly, CNT offers the following recommendations for implementation of the ART:  
 
Protect the integrity of the ART plan and implement the full service as proposed:  In the event that full 
funding of the ART would not be secured by a pending federal Small Starts grant and local funds now 
committed as a match, additional funds should be sought through other federal grant programs and 
local sources. If necessary, prudent borrowing through federal programs that are readily available during 
2016 should be used. Any substantial cuts in operating capacity, service, or route would undermine the 
connectivity or reliability of the ART and diminish its potential value. The most important step that 
Albuquerque can make to encourage large and early private investment linked to the ART is to operate 
the fully conceived system from its inception and so convince the market that this system’s potential 
long-term value will be realized.  
 
Accelerate Development of the Second ART Line and Ancillary Services: The envisioned second ART line, 
which will link the Albuquerque International Sunport and a large section of the city to Downtown and 
the University of New Mexico, should be implemented with all possible speed. The value of a transit 
system depends to a large degree in its connectivity. To the extent that the ART offers access to more 
destinations it will be more widely used and the value of properties with access to it will grow. For the 
same reason connections from ART stations via conventional bus service or shuttle services to major 
retail or commercial centers should be studied and optimized whenever possible. Possible funding 
mechanisms for such service may be Transportation Management Associations (TMAs) – associations of 
employers that contribute financially to services that benefit their workers and enlarge their job or 
customer pool.   
 
Prioritize Economic Development Initiatives and Programs Inter-related with the ART: The first of these 
initiatives should be completion of Albuquerque’s Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) process so 
that it establishes by right zoning that permits construction at the level of density appropriate to 
Downtown, Urban Neighborhood, or Town Center transit station areas, accompanied by building 
standards and public investments that create pedestrian-friendly environments in transit-served 
neighborhoods. Economic development programs should focus on coordinating tax incentives, low-
interest financing, small scale infrastructure investments, workforce training, and other enterprise 
support programs to ensure the development of ART station areas. Public agencies should also prepare 
workforce housing  and worker training programs that will enable residents in a broad range of income 
levels to enjoy the benefits of development as property values in the ART corridor rise.  
 
 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-6 
 
I.  Albuquerque’s Need and Opportunity for Transit-Oriented Development 
 
A. Coordinating Land Use and Transportation  
 
Over the past fifteen years, the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area (AMPA) experienced rapid growth and 
land use patterns changed substantially as a result. The region spread outwards into the desert with the 
large majority of the growth in housing over this period occurring in Sandoval and Valencia Counties. 
During the housing bubble, this trend accelerated and led to the rapid construction of single-family 
housing on the outer edges of those counties. This land development pattern drove substantial 
increases in pollution, congestion and infrastructure maintenance costs. It has also resulted in a 
considerable mismatch between the location of housing and the location of employment in the AMPA 
region, which increases commute times, exacerbates congestion and decreases economic opportunity. 
In its most recent Long Range Transportation Plan, 2040 Futures, the Mid-Region Council of 
Governments (MRCOG) emphasizes many proposals that will link land use and transportation planning 
in order to mitigate these problems, change development patterns and position the AMPA to capitalize 
on its assets as the region grows in the coming decades. A basic strategy of this plan is the expansion 
and improvement of the public transit system and the concentration of future real estate development 
along transit corridors. The construction of a Bus Rapid Transit line on Central Avenue, named the 
Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART), is a key component of this strategy.  
As the 2040 Futures plan explains, residential and employment location patterns contribute to the 
increasing congestion at the bridges in the AMPA region. While most recent housing growth has 
occurred west of the Rio Grande, the majority of jobs continue to be located east of the river. This has 
led to severe congestion at the bridges as workers who live west of the river travel east to their jobs. 
This jobs-housing imbalance is depicted in Table 1 below wherein “ratios [of jobs to housing units] above 
one are considered a healthy balance, and it is generally assumed that a higher jobs-housing ratio 
equates to more opportunities to live close to work and shop close to home, thereby enabling shorter 
driving distances.”1   
 
Table I.1: Jobs-Housing Ratio 
 
                                                          
1 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. 2-10.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-7 
 
Source: Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. 2-10, Table 2-3. 
 
Though the jobs-housing ratio is substantially better east of the river, it too has worsened considerably 
since 2000. The net result of changes over the past ten years has created a situation in which, if current 
trends continue, the AMPA region will experience continually increasing congestion, especially  at the 
bridges that cross the Rio Grande.  
 
MRCOG periodically measures congestion in corridors throughout the AMPA and publishes a list of the 
30 most congested corridors in the region. While Central Avenue was ranked 20th in 2008 and 2010, the 
corridor was the 12th most congested in the region in 2012 .2 This is especially problematic due to the 
large job centers and major employers located in the corridor. 
 
One cause of this congestion is the overreliance on single-occupancy vehicle commuting throughout the 
region. MRCOG examined local travel behavior in a recent report, “Commuting Characteristics in the 
Albuquerque Metropolitan Area: An Analysis of Changing Travel Behavior, 2006-2013.” This study found 
that despite decreases in per capita vehicle miles traveled and a considerable increase in transit 
ridership, single-occupancy vehicle use is actually increasing throughout the region. As a result, “the 
Albuquerque [Metropolitan Statistical Area] MSA stands above the national average overall in total auto 
commuting mostly due to the high rate of commuters driving alone.”3 If alternatives to single-occupancy 
vehicle travel are not provided, this problem will only increase as the population grows.  
 
Though MRCOG revised its population projections for 2035 downwards from its projections in 2010 by 
15%, the MPO still predicts that the region will grow by nearly half a million people by 2040. MRCOG 
predicts that this will have a dramatic impact on travel demand and congestion with a 51% increase in 
daily vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and an increase of 94% in Rio Grande river crossings.4  
 
No new bridges are planned for the region, so the MRCOG must find alternate methods to relieve 
congestion. These include increasing employment west of the river and increasing housing east of the 
river. Another method is to increase and improve transit service that crosses the Rio Grande in order to 
decrease the number of cars using the bridges. This strategy is outlined in the Long Range 
Transportation Plan, in which the MPO proposes the establishment of a Priority Transit Network that 
would provide a convenient means for 20% of trips over the Rio Grande to be taken by transit by 2040. 
Beginning in 2016, 25% of sub-allocated federal transportation funding will be spent on transit in order 
to achieve this goal.5  
 
In preparing its 2040 Long Range Transportation Plan, the MRCOG created multiple scenarios. The Trend 
                                                          
2 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “A Profile in Congestion: The 30 Most Congested Corridors in the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area” Oct. 
2013, p. 26.    
3 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “Commuting Characteristics in the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area: An Analysis of Changing Travel 
Behavior, 2006-2013.” Sep. 2015, p. 3. 
4 Mid-Region Council of Governments PowerPoint Presentation, “2040 Population Projections…and their Implications for the 2040 Metropolitan 
Transportation Plan,” p. 18.  
http://www.mrcog-nm.gov/images/stories/pdf/transportation/CMP/CMP_2040PopulationProjections.pdf. Accessed on December 28, 2015. 
5 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, Appendix K. 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-8 
 
Scenario explores what would happen if there are no major changes to transportation infrastructure or 
land use patterns in the region. The Preferred Scenario envisions a different future in which major 
investments are made in transportation infrastructure with the result of increasing the levels of new 
construction, employment , and residential density in transit corridors. As the LRTP states, “In many 
respects, transit is an organizing principle for the Preferred Scenario: not only are transit nodes 
emphasized for additional development, but services are enhanced to provide meaningful connections 
across the metropolitan area and improve travelers’ ability to reach their destinations without relying 
exclusively on private vehicles.”6 Table 2 demonstrates the dramatic effects that improving transit 
service and prioritizing development in transit corridors is projected to have on the region.  
Table I.2: 2012-2040 Growth Rates for Select Performance Measures: Trend and Preferred Scenarios  
 
Source: Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. 1-13, Table EX-3. 
 
In addition to congestion, the sprawling development of land and increased single-occupancy vehicle 
travel in recent years has contributed to further substantial problems, such as increased water usage, 
the rising costs of infrastructure maintenance, declining air quality due to CO2 emissions and heightened 
risk of forest fires. As MRCOG explains and Table 2 shows, however, the Preferred Scenario 
“demonstrates that a long-range vision for growth can have a variety of benefits, including better 
transportation conditions, fewer investments in new infrastructure, and improved air quality and 
reduced emissions…”7  
 
The ART system will not only aid in the reduction of congestion along Central Avenue, but will also help 
contribute to economic development throughout the corridor. In 2013, TRIP, a national transportation 
research group, ranked the Central Avenue Bus Rapid Transit project number 7 on its list of the “Top 50 
                                                          
6 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. ex-4.  
7 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “2040 Long Range Transportation Plan,” April 2015, p. 168. 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-9 
 
Transportation Projects to Support Economic Growth and Quality of Life in New Mexico.” The authors of 
this report described the ART as a vital “connector of transit destinations … that would assist in 
redevelopment of the vacant or underused land” in the corridor.8 
 
B. Economic Growth and Changing Preferences  
 
According to analysis by the Bureau of Business and Economic Research (BBER) at the University of New 
Mexico, New Mexico’s economy has lagged behind the economies of neighboring states in the 
Southwest in recent years.9 Even more worrisome, Director of the BBER Jeffrey Mitchell notes, is that 
“Albuquerque isn't even keeping pace with the slow growth in the rest of New Mexico. Albuquerque is 
trailing the state. From what we see, Albuquerque is continually losing jobs while competing cities are 
doing very well.”10 Of particular concern is the continued loss of business and professional employment, 
which includes white-collar jobs such as attorneys, accountants, architects, engineers and computer 
technicians. Mitchell calls this sector a “bellwether of where we’re going,” since, as he explains, this 
sector is “leading the national rebound in jobs,” but it has declined continuously in the AMPA since 
2010.11 This decline may be surprising because Albuquerque has led New Mexico in job growth in past 
decades and because the region includes institutions that specialize in research and development 
including the University of New Mexico (UNM), UNM’s hospital system, and a base of technology 
companies. One for reason for this relative decline may lie in the changing preferences of millennial and 
knowledge workers and the companies that employ them.  
As the Urban Land Institute notes in its 2015 survey of opinions about housing and transportation, over 
half of Americans “would like to live in a place where they do not need to use a car very often,” and this 
attitude is especially prevalent among millennials (63%).12 There is already an organization of local 
millennials, MiABQ, advocating for increased transit and the land use changes that transit can enable, 
such as walkable environments.13 Over 70% of millennials plan to move within the next 5 years and in 
order for Albuquerque to attract and retain these young workers, it will need to provide housing options 
that are in line with their preferences, which differ from most of the existing housing stock in the region. 
Millennial workers will power the economy for generations so attracting them to Albuquerque now, 
before they have settled down with families, is an urgent priority, which the ART can go a long way 
towards fulfilling. Additionally, as Baby Boomers grow older, providing housing options near high-quality 
transit will become increasingly desirable, as it will serve to both enhance their quality of life by 
                                                          
8 TRIP: The Road Information Program, “Top 50 Transportation Projects to Support Economic Growth and Quality of Life in New Mexico,” Aug. 
2013, p. 9. http://www.tripnet.org/docs/NM_TRIP_Economic_Development_Report_Aug_2013.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.  
9 Mitchell, Jeffrey, “New Mexico’s Economy: Recent Developments and Outlook,” Bureau of Business and Economic Research, Jan. 2015. 
https://bber.unm.edu/presentations/BBER-EconOutlook2015.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.  
10 Mayfield, Dan, “NM economic expert: 'While the nation has been growing, we've gone sideways’,” Albuquerque Business First, Jan. 2015. 
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/news/2015/01/15/nm-economic-research-expert-while-the-nation-has.html. Accessed on Oct. 15, 
2015.  
11 Metcalf, Richard, “Job growth positive but slow in NM,” Albuquerque Journal, Jan. 16, 2015.  
http://www.abqjournal.com/527145/news/job-growth-positive-but-slow-in-nm.html. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.   
12 Urban Land Institute, “America in 2015: A ULI Survey of Views on Housing, Transportation, and Community,” June 2015, p. 25. 
http://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ULI-Documents/America-in-2015.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.   
13 MiABQ Millennials Project, “Recommendations for Downtown Revitalization,” April 20, 2015. 
http://www.miabq.com/uploads/files/MiABQ%20Round%202%20Recommendations%20-%20April%202015.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.   


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-10 
 
maintaining their mobility, while also allowing local businesses to capture their discretionary spending.14  
If the full development potential of the ART and other transit investments is realized in Albuquerque and 
the AMPA, this growth will not decrease the supply of single-family housing or transform the 
predominantly car-oriented culture of Albuquerque. The large majority of the region’s residents will 
continue to use the car as their primary mode of transportation. The ART will, however, offer another 
travel option, which will foster greater diversity in the types of neighborhoods and lifestyles that the 
city’s transportation infrastructure is able to support.  
 
C. Capitalizing on Assets, Realizing Plans  
 
Many efforts to increase economic development along the Central Avenue Corridor are already 
underway or in the planning stage, including the expansion of the UNM Hospital and campus, ABQ the 
Plan,15 Innovate ABQ,16 STC.UNM (UNM technology transfer non-profit organization),17 the Downtown 
ABQ Mainstreet Initiative18 and the Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan.19 As part of ABQ Ride’s 
application for federal Small Starts funding to build the ART, the transit agency listed 17 significant 
multifamily or mixed use projects, representative of the types of development that the ART will foster, 
that have been built in recent years, and another 12 projects that are proposed in the Central Street 
corridor.20  The ART is a prominent feature of these plans and projects can serve as the “spine” of 
redevelopment efforts, according to Albuquerque’s Mayor Richard Berry.21 Technology and start-up 
companies are currently dispersed throughout the region without any particular geographic proximity to 
each other, which serves to blunt the intense innovation and job creation that can occur when these 
types of companies and institutions are located in a dense area, such as in Silicon Valley or the Boston 
region.22 Innovate ABQ seeks to concentrate many of these companies into a cluster called Innovation 
Central in Downtown Albuquerque and thereby “…create an environment with improved innovation-
based employment opportunities that will help attract a new generation of high-caliber students, 
faculty, researchers, innovators, and entrepreneurs” to the region.23  
 
                                                          
14 Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies, “Housing America’s Older Adults – Meeting the Needs of an Aging Population,” 2014. 
http://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/jchs.harvard.edu/files/jchs-housing_americas_older_adults_2014-ch7-references.pdf Accessed on Jan. 4, 
2015.  
15 City of Albuquerque, “ABQ the Plan: Investing in the future of Albuquerque,” June 2014.  https://www.cabq.gov/mayor/priorities-and-
initiatives/initiatives/abq-the-plan. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015 
16 Innovate ABQ. http://innovateabq.com. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015.  
17 STC.UNM, https://stc.unm.edu/_files/150310-ABQ-EDF-Presentation.pdf. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015. 
18 Downtown ABQ Mainstreet Initiative, http://www.abqmainstreet.org. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015. 
19 City of Albuquerque, “Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan” June 2014. 
https://www.cabq.gov/planning/documents/copy_of_Downtown2025_Dec14r.pdf. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015. 
20 ABQ Ride, Supplemental Land Use and Economic Development Information and Supporting Documentation Templates for Small Starts 
Projects, Draft Submittal for the City of Albuquerque, Albuquerque Rapid Transit Project, July 2, 2015   
21 Metcalf, Richard, “Revitalizing ABQ’s ‘spine’,” Albuquerque Journal, Oct. 12, 2015. http://www.abqjournal.com/658300. Accessed on Nov. 30, 
2015.  
22 Innovate ABQ PowerPoint Presentation to New Mexico Legislative Finance Committee, June 24, 2015.  
http://www.nmlegis.gov/lcs/handouts/ALFC%20062415%20Item%204%20LFC%20Innovate%20ABQ%20150624.pdf. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.  
And the Brooking Institution’s discussion of Innovation Centers http://www.brookings.edu/about/programs/metro/innovation-districts  
23 Innovate ABQ, “Innovate ABQ Development Framework,” April 15, 1015. http://innovateabq.com/developmentframework/. Accessed on Oct. 
15, 2015.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-11 
 
This initiative will help to reverse the trend of declining employment in the business and professional 
services, which BBER Director Mitchell sees as essential to improving Albuquerque’s economy. The 
designation of Central Avenue as Innovation Corridor is a fundamental part of the plan and the ART will 
play a vital role in making the city desirable for the workers that Innovate ABQ seeks to attract to the 
region.  Many local business leaders have already determined that this effort has tremendous potential 
and is important for the city’s future. As several prominent developers have noted, Innovate ABQ and 
the potential BRT line are already propelling development to the corridor.24  
 
D. Integrating Redevelopment Efforts and Zoning  
 
1. Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas  
Land use and zoning regulations will also play an essential role in this transformative process. The City of 
Albuquerque’s Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency has established numerous Metropolitan 
Redevelopment Areas (MRA’s) in the Central Avenue Corridor. MRA’s are designed to aid the 
redevelopment of community areas in the city by using tax incentives and infrastructure improvements 
to encourage private sector development in blighted or underutilized areas. In particular, MRA’s are 
tools for promoting the “efficient allocation of public and private resources, concentrating on land uses 
for greater efficiency, stability, image, diversity and control.”25 
 
Nearly the entire ART corridor on Central Avenue falls within an existing MRA with the most recent 
being the Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan, which was established in 2013 and 
runs along Central Avenue from the Rio Grande River to the western edge of Downtown.26 MRAs also 
permit changes to the zoning code, within their areas, in order to incentivize desired types of 
development. 
 
                                                          
24 Guzman, Stephanie, “Rapid transit, Innovate ABQ drives redevelopment in Central corridor,” Albuquerque Business First, Sep. 18, 2015.  
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/print-edition/2015/09/18/rapid-transit-innovate-abq-drives-redevelopment-in.html Accessed on 
Oct. 15, 2015.  
Guzman, Stephanie, “Titan CEO answers the 'why now?' of new Central Avenue project near UNM,” Albuquerque Business First, Sep. 22, 2015. 
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/blog/real-estate/2015/09/titan-ceo-answers-the-why-now-of-new-central.html. Accessed on Oct. 
15, 2015. 
Scott, Damon, “Nob Hill’s Platinum aiming for young professionals,” Albuquerque Business First, June 11, 2014.  
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/news/2014/06/11/nob-hill-s-platinum-aiming-for-young-professionals.html. Accessed Oct. 15, 2015. 
25 City of Albuquerque, Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, https://www.cabq.gov/planning/metropolitan-redevelopment-agency. Accessed 
on December 28, 2015.  
26 City of Albuquerque, “Historic Central: Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan,” Dec. 2, 2013. 
https://www.cabq.gov/planning/documents/HistoricCentralMRAHCMRADec2013AsAdopted.pdf. Accessed December 21, 2015.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-12 
 
27 
 
2.   Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO)  
The City of Albuquerque and Bernalillo County are currently in the midst of a 2-year process to create an 
updated and consolidated zoning code. Both city officials and private developers feel that this is a 
necessary step to streamlining the real estate development process while protecting neighborhoods and 
encouraging growth. One of the most important features of this IDO will be the simplification and 
standardization of the zoning code throughout the city. As the initial report on the ABC-Z process 
explains, currently only 53% of the city is covered by “standard” zoning districts; “the remaining 47% is 
governed by SU or overlay districts.” 28The current state of zoning in the city stifles growth, as its 
complexity causes confusion and acts as a constraint on real estate development. With the adoption of 
new IDO, the city will seek to clarify the zoning code and thereby incentivize development, which will be 
concentrated in downtown areas and transit corridors.  Zoning measures suggested by the literature on 
BRT that should be considered in the IDO process include: density bonuses, higher Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR), street-facing orientation for buildings, specified setbacks, mixed-use and TOD, and pedestrian-
oriented design standards.29 
                                                          
27 Data Source: AGIS Division, Planning Department  City of Albuquerque: 
https://abqbrt.blob.core.windows.net/resources/FTASmallStarts/Economic%20Development/Attachment%20A_Metropolitan%20Redevelopm
ent%20Areas_opt.pdf 
28 Clarion Associates, LLC, “Albuquerque ABC-Z: Land Regulation Diagnosis, Best Practices, and Annotated Outline,” May 2015, p. 5. 
http://albuquerque.engagingplans.org/sites/albuquerque.engagingplans.org/files/pdf/Diagnosis-Best%20Practices-
Outline%20PUBLIC%20DRAFT.pdf. Accessed on December 21, 2015.  
29 Arthur C. Nelson & Joanna Ganning, “National Study of BRT Development Outcomes”, page 56, National Institute for Transportation and 
Communities (NITC), January 2015, http://www.lulu.com/shop/arthur-c-nelson/nitc-rr-650-national-study-of-brt-development-
outcomes/paperback/product-22468494.html?ppn=1   


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-13 
 
 
E. Early Albuquerque Market Developments  
 
Though transit is already popular along Central Avenue, accounting for 42% of total system ridership,30 
implementation of a full-service bus rapid transit line will allow the city to capitalize on recent 
demographic trends (including growing numbers of seniors and millennials’ preference for urban 
housing) to increase economic development along the corridor. Some of this transit-oriented 
development is occurring already in Downtown,31 Sawmill,32 EDO33 and Nob Hill.34 An analysis of 
economic development opportunities completed in 2011 for the city also found substantial potential for 
economic growth along Central Avenue west of the Rio Grande.35  
 
ART can contribute to and drive many of these investment decisions. When asked about his recent 
decision to develop a large property along the corridor, Titan CEO Ben Spencer explained that his 
decision was heavily influenced by plans for the ART, stating, "We're very supportive of ART. This project 
is not contingent upon the opening of ART. But we think the ART will be a tremendous benefit to this 
project and we think it will spur more development along the corridor."  
 
F. True Rapid Transit 
 
The Albuquerque transit system’s “Rapid Ride” program has increased the frequency of service along 
designated routes, including Central Avenue, and has triggered consistent increases in ridership in 
recent years. The ART will build on the success of Rapid Ride by introducing true bus rapid transit service 
with dedicated transit lanes, prioritized signaling at intersections, per-boarding ticketing, level boarding 
platforms and a service frequency of 7.5 to 15 minutes, depending on location in the corridor.36 These 
basic improvements in transit service are expected to result in a 15% improvement in travel time as well 
as a 20-25% improvement in on-time performance.37 As Dayna Crawford, deputy director of the city’s 
Transit Department, explains, “the Rapid Ride bus routes on Central are “often at capacity, delayed by 
                                                          
30 City of Albuquerque, “ABQ the Plan: Investing in the future of Albuquerque,” June 2014, p. 20. https://www.cabq.gov/mayor/priorities-and-
initiatives/initiatives/abq-the-plan. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015 
31 Scott, Damon, “A car-loving city hits the brakes,” Albuquerque Business First, April 11, 2015. http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/print-
edition/2014/04/11/a-car-loving-city-hits-the-brakes.html. Accessed on Oct. 15, 2015.  
32 Guzman, Stephanie, “Construction launches on Sawmill apartment complex,” Albuquerque Business Journal, Oct. 6, 2015.  
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/blog/real-estate/2015/10/construction-launches-on-sawmill-apartment-complex.html. Accessed 
Oct. 15, 2015.  
33 Guzman, Stephanie, “Titan CEO answers the 'why now?' of new Central Avenue project near UNM,” Sep. 22, 2015.  
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/blog/real-estate/2015/09/titan-ceo-answers-the-why-now-of-new-central.html. Accessed Oct. 15, 
2015. 
34 Guzman, Stephanie, “Apartment projects continue to emerge in East Nob Hill,” Oct. 12, 2015. 
http://www.bizjournals.com/albuquerque/blog/real-estate/2015/10/apartment-projects-continue-to-emerge-in-east-nob.html?iana=ind_cre. 
Accessed Oct. 15, 2015. 
35 Gibbs Planning Group, Inc., “Retail Market Analysis: West Central District, Albuquerque, NM,” Jan. 2011. 
https://www.cabq.gov/planning/documents/WestRte66RetailMarketAnalysis0311.pdf. Accessed Dec. 22, 2015 
36 MRCOG, “White Paper – Regional Accessibility Benefits Associated with Implementation of the Albuquerque Rapid Transit on Central 
Avenue”, December 2015 
37 City of Albuquerque, “ART Fact Sheet,” November 2015. https://www.cabq.gov/transit/documents/art-landscape-handout-november-
2015.pdf. Accessed December 28, 2015.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-14 
 
traffic” and, as a result, suffer from poor reliability of service.38 In addition to improved service levels 
and increased transit speeds, the permanent physical infrastructure and street design of the ART would 
also play an essential role in attracting and expanding economic development in the corridor. In many 
ways, however, it is the increased accessibility that improved transit service will provide to Albuquerque 
residents that will lead to the greatest gains in economic development.  
 
Increasing accessibility is one of the most significant ways that public transit promotes economic 
development. Improved accessibility is vital to regional economic growth as it provides increased 
regional efficiency, while strengthening linkages between workers and employment. A study by 
Professor Joseph Berechman showed that from the worker’s perspective, “improved accessibility has a 
positive impact on economic development in terms of changes in employment and earnings.”39 
Accessibility can also play an important role in improving the economic prospects of low-income and 
transit dependent citizens. As Professor Todd Litman explains, “improving affordable, accessibility 
options directly benefits disadvantaged people, improves their access to education and employment, 
and therefore their productivity… and improves their ability to access medical services and healthy food, 
which reduces healthcare costs.”40 
 
Beyond improving economic outcomes for individuals and households, accessibility can play an 
important role in regional economic development by linking job centers and workers, especially when 
transit is connected to economic clusters. As Robert Puentes notes, “improving transportation 
connections to jobs enhances the efficiency of labor markets for both workers and employers. A high 
quality public transit network can allow employers to benefit from the clustering and agglomeration of 
people and businesses, and thereby raise productivity in metro areas.”41 
 
The recent MRCOG whitepaper noted earlier measured the number of residents and jobs that could be 
reached within 45 minutes using the level of accessibility available through the ART. The results, as 
depicted in Table 3, demonstrate that the ART would improve accessibility substantially for residents 
throughout the city, as compared to the current regular and Rapid Ride bus service.42  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
38 Westphal, D’val, “The pros and cons of ABQ bus rapid transit,” Albuquerque Journal, Sep. 18, 2015.  
http://www.abqjournal.com/646078/news/the-pros-and-cons-of-albuquerques-proposed-bus-rapid-transit-on-central.html. Accessed Dec. 22, 
2015. 
39 Ozbay, k., Ozmen-Ertekin, Berechman,J., “Empirical Analysis of Relationship between Accessibility and Economic Development,” Journal of 
Urban Planning and Development, 1 June 2003, p. 13. 
40 Litman, p. 9. 
41 Puentes, et. al., “Missed Opportunity: Transit and Jobs in Metropolitan America,” Brookings Institution, May 2011, p. 3. 
  42 Mid-Region Council of Governments, “White Paper – Regional Accessibility Benefits Associated With Implementation of the Albuquerque 
Rapid Transit on Central Ave,” December 2015.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-15 
 
Table I.3: Jobs and Residents Accessible Within 45 Minutes: Before and After ART Implementation 
 
Source: Mid-Region Council of Governments, “White Paper – Regional Accessibility Benefits Associated With Implementation of 
the Albuquerque Rapid Transit on Central Ave,” December 2015, Table 1, p. 5.  
 
Since the ART intersects with so many north-south bus lines, the accessibility improvements of this 
service will extend to many residents who do not live directly in the Central Avenue corridor. The 
benefits of this transit enhancement (including improvement in employment and earnings, travel time 
savings, and quality of life) will not be confined to residents and businesses in the corridor, but broadly 
shared by residents throughout the city.  As Puentes explains, these considerable accessibility 
improvements will also increase economic efficiency and influence business location decisions, which 
will likely lead to increased development along the Central Avenue corridor. 
 
G. Matching Comparable Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Projects in Other Cities 
 
1.  
   
 
 
BRT Investments in Comparable Cities   
BRT is a relatively new form of transportation in the US. CNT could identify only 12 examples of BRT in 
America for which research has been published in the professional literature. Of these systems, only the 
BRT lines of Pittsburg were in operation before 2005, and some of the types of data needed for a 
comprehensive analysis of BRT performance are only available through 2012. Moreover, these cases 
vary widely in terms of the physical elements of their BRT systems, the types of locations they connect, 
and the size and economic health of the cities in which they are located. Within these limitations several 
studies have examined the economic impacts of BRT in America to date and the results of this research 
are informative and encouraging  for the development of the ART.  
 
In its overview of BRT case studies throughout North America, the Institute for Transportation and 
Development Policy (ITDP) observes that, depending on local conditions, BRT can prompt levels of 
economic development that are equal to or greater than similar light rail or streetcar systems. 
Furthermore, since BRT systems are cheaper to build and operate, they can “leverage far more TOD 
investment per dollar of transit investment. ITDP analysts advocate for BRT as a means to “bring jobs, 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-16 
 
activity, and life back into their communities” and note the “success of BRT as a mobility option and as 
an economic development lever.”43 
 
A 2012 study by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) entitled “Bus Rapid Transit: Projects 
Improve Service and Can Contribute to Economic Development,” also supports this claim. The GAO 
determined that BRT has the ability to increase economic development. The study states that BRT can 
enhance economic development in a manner similar to rail transit when certain conditions are present, 
including physical BRT features that convey a sense of permanence to developers, major institutional 
employment and activity centers along or near the BRT corridor, and transit-supportive local policies 
and development incentives.” 44 Albuquerque’s planned ART possesses all of these attributes. The city’s 
largest employment centers lie along the proposed ART line, institutions such as the UNM and Innovate 
ABQ strongly support implementation of the ART, as do leaders of the regional development 
community, and Mayor Berry is a staunch proponent of the project. 
 
The ITDP prepared the following summary of investments made in transit corridors for BRT and 
comparable streetcar and light rail systems. It shows that a number of cities have seen substantial 
economic development investments along their BRT routes, during a brief period that included the 
worst recession in 80 years. These cases include Cleveland ($5.8b), Pittsburgh ($903m), Las Vegas 
($2.0b), Kansas City ($5.2b) and Eugene, Ore ($100m).45 In several of these cities the large scale of 
investment within a few years of the BRT’s opening indicates that significant projects were launched in 
anticipation of the transit service’s operation. It is important to note that these figures are based 
entirely of the value of developments built in BRT corridors. They do not reflect travel time savings, 
individual transportation expenditures, increased economic and labor market efficiency or increased 
earnings and employment due to improved accessibility, which, when quantified, constitute substantial 
benefits of improved transit service. 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
43 Hook, W., Lotshaw, S., and Weinstock, A., “More Development for your Transit Dollar: An Analysis of 21 North American Transit Corridors,” 
Institute for Transportation Policy and Development,” 2014, p. 152. 
44 U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Bus Rapid Transit: Projects Improve Service and Can Contribute to Economic Development,” July 
2012, p. 38. 
45 Hook, p. 95. 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-17 
 
Table I.4. Investments Linked to BRT Comparable Projects  
 
 
 
The ITDP has also summarized investments in transit corridors in relationship to the general economic 
condition of the region in which they are located. This summary shows that large development 
investments have been made along BRT routes in several cities where the economy was only fair or 
poor.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-18 
 
 
 
2.   Early Outcomes from BRT Investments in Comparable Cities   
A study sponsored by the National Institute for Transportation and Communities (NITC) and released in 
January 2016 has deepened our understanding of the economic impacts of BRT. NITC’s analyses are 
limited by the basic fact that, with one exception, BRT systems in the US have only been operating since 
2005 or later. When sufficient data is available, the NITC study rigorously compares levels of 
development achieved in BRT corridors with development that has occurred in control areas, which are 
similar to the BRT corridors but without rapid transit service. Comparisons are also made between 
development in BRT corridors and the general pace of development in the urban counties where BRT 
routes are located. NITC’s overall conclusions might be fairly summarized by saying that BRT has positive 
economic impacts, in so far as impacts can be determined from available data, but it is not a magic 
bullet for economic development. In northeastern cities that have been losing population and jobs for 
decades BRT has not reversed these trends in a few years, but population and job loss has usually been 
slowed in BRT corridors. In southwestern regions that have followed decentralized patterns of 
development for decades, BRT corridors have usually achieved positive growth, surpassing regional 
growth rates for some types of properties, but the general rate of growth is not yet faster than the pace 
of regional sprawl.46  While the NITC study continually qualifies its findings in light of data limitations, it 
reports a number of meaningful, specific analytical results.  
 
The NITC study analyzed new development patterns within BRT corridors between the periods 2000 
and 2007, before the Great Recession, and 2008 to 2015, covering the recession and recovery. This 
analysis found that BRT corridors increased their share of new office space in the counties where 
they are located by a third, from 11.4 percent to 15.2 percent. We also find that although new 
                                                          
46 Arthur C. Nelson & Joanna Ganning, “National Study of BRT Development Outcomes”, Executive Summary and Conclusions, National 
Institute for Transportation and Communities (NITC), January 2015, http://www.lulu.com/shop/arthur-c-nelson/nitc-rr-650-national-study-of-
brt-development-outcomes/paperback/product-22468494.html?ppn=1 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-19 
 
multifamily apartment construction within 0.50 mile of BRT was small, its share of multifamily 
housing in the county has more than doubled since 2008. NITC concluded that BRT corridors appear 
to be gaining market share for new offices and multifamily apartments.47  
 
Table I.6 Distribution of Office Development 2000-2007 and 2008-2015 
Metric 
BRT Metros 
2000-2007 
New Office Square Feet 
39,292,786 
<=0.50 mile Transit 
4,487,390 
BRT Corridor Share 
11.4% 
2007-2015 
New Office Square Feet 
13,682,472 
<=0.50 mile Transit 
2,081,209 
BRT Corridor Share 
15.2% 
Change in Share of New Office Development 
33.2% 
Note: Difference in share have z-scores resulting in p <0.01. 
<= means less than or equal to.48 
 
 
Table I.7 Distribution of Multifamily Apartment Development 2000-2007 and 2008-2015 
 
Metric 
BRT Metros 
2000-2007 
New MF Square Feet 
25,271,580 
<0.50 mile Transit 
546,325 
Share 
2.2% 
2007-2015 
New MF Square Feet 
6,746,189 
<0.50 mile Transit 
349,177 
Share 
5.2% 
Change in Share of New Multifamily Units 
139.4% 
 
Source49 
 
The NITC study notes that there is a large body of literature showing that office properties capitalize 
on the benefits of rail transit proximity to achieve higher rents and values. NITC found that in most 
metropolitan areas, BRT systems are associated with higher office rents per square foot within 0.50 
mile of BRT stations, apparently influencing non-residential property rents in ways similar to rail 
transit.50      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
47 Nelson, NITC, pages 30-32 
48 Ibid 
49 Ibid 
50 Nelson, NITC, pages 65-67 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-20 
 
Table I.8 Summary of BRT Corridor Location and Office Rents 
System 
Central County 
Downtown 
Outside Downtown 
Cleveland 
  
$2.44  
  
Eugene-Springfield 
  
$1.93  
  
Kansas City 
  
$2.67  
  
Las Vegas 
$4.81  
+ 
$4.85  
Pittsburgh 
$1.57  
+ 
$2.30  
Note: “+” means predicted direction of association but statistically insignificant coefficient51 
 
Another significant finding of the NITC study is that BRT corridors generally out performed areas 
that were comparable but lacked public transit (called “counter-factual” areas) in job growth. NITC 
compared job growth in BRT and counter-factual areas in the years leading to the great recession,  
through 2007, and in the in the first years of recovery from the recession, 2008-2011. In most 
regions job loss was greater in the BRT corridors through 2007 (years when most BRT systems were 
either not yet in operation or just beginning to function), but positive job growth in BRT corridors 
was significantly higher than in the control areas during the recession recovery years (when BRT 
systems were in operation).52  
 
Table I.9 Mean Block Group Shift-Share Summary of BRT Station Area and Counter-Factual Locations 
before Recession (2002/2004-2007) and during Recovery (2008-2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
Pre-Recession Shift-Share     Recovery Shift-Share  
BRT Line  
Counter-
Factual  
BRT  
Counter-
Factual  
BRT  
Pittsburgh South—1977 – Basic  
-14.4  
-62.9  
-10.0  
-108.8  
Pittsburgh East—1983 – Bronze  
49.4  
5.7  
-5.0  
34.1  
Pittsburgh West— 2000 – Basic  
-23.6  
-133.3  
-3.3  
86.4  
Las Vegas MAX—2004 - Unrated  
-140.8  
-203.5  
223.5  
-13.1  
Los Angeles Orange—2005 - Bronze  
5.8  
63.3  
-67.2  
-55.4  
Los Angeles Silver—2009 - Unrated  
29.4  
-137.8  
-32.9  
1,035.5  
Kansas City Main Street—2005 - Unrated  
6.8  
-9.6  
-47.6  
9.9  
Eugene-Springfield Emerald Express—2007 - Bronze  
-1.6  
5.0  
-6.5  
34.8  
Cleveland Health Line—2008 - Silver  
-17.1  
-24.4  
-45.8  
-29.1  
Bronx Pelham Parkway—2008 - Unrated  
-0.9  
-6.2  
-4.2  
40.8  
Phoenix Main Street—2008 - Unrated  
-10.5  
-44.2  
-20.3  
-72.9  
Salt Lake City MAX—2008 - Unrated  
-67.4  
-44.5  
-57.1  
95.0  
Positive Shift in Share  
4  
3  
1  
7  
Unweighted (summed) means*  
(214.3)  
(454.6)  
(43.5)  
21.8  
 
*Excludes Los Angeles Silver Line [considered an outlier because job growth was so high in this corridor] 
Note: Coefficients are the sum of the “industry share” of the shift in mean jobs per block group from shift-share analysis 
comparing change in share of total jobs between BRT station areas and counter-factual locations with respect to their central 
county over pre-recession (2002-2007; Phoenix is 2004-2007) and recovery (2008-2011) periods.53 
 
                                                          
51 Ibid  
52 Nelson, NITC, pages 52-4 
53 Ibid, page 53  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-21 
 
 
3.    
Similarities in BRT Research Findings  
In regard to several aspects of economic development, the NITC study reports that BRT systems 
with technical features of design and equipment which enable them to serve their customers with 
greater speed and reliability, appear to achieve stronger positive economic impacts than BRT 
services that lacked these characteristics. This observation agrees with findings of ITDP and GAO 
research that BRT systems with such features as dedicated lanes, signal priority, pre-boarding fare 
systems, and permanent stations, are likely to generate higher levels of ridership and related 
private investment. The NITC, ITDP, and GAO studies also agree that BRT systems are likely to 
succeed as transit services and as drivers of economic development to the extent that they:  
• 
Connect dense residential neighborhoods to centers of employment, vital services, and 
entertainment  
• 
Provide reliable accessibility to other transit services  
• 
Operate in conjunction with local government and civic initiatives that attract and 
incentivize private investment, in part by providing a zoning environment that will 
encourage dense development coupled with place-making initiatives.54 
 
This level of agreement in BRT research is positive news for Albuquerque and the ART in two 
respects. First, the proposed ART incorporates state-of-the-art technology, design and operating 
practices; it connects the primary centers of employment and services within the city to rapidly 
growing neighborhoods and other transportation services; it is an integral part of other progressive 
development initiatives within the city and region, including the preferred development scenario of 
MRCOG, Innovate ABQ, and a growth-oriented and comprehensive zoning reform program – all 
points that are discussed Sections I.A.-F. of this report. In short, the ART proposal incorporates 
those features that national experience indicates are elements of successful BRT operation and 
positive economic impact. Second, the characteristics of successful BRT operation and linked 
development are, to a large extent controllable. While risk is involved in achieving the objectives of 
any major infrastructure investment, Albuquerque can reduce these risks by fully executing its well-
conceived ART plans and continuing to refine its strategies in light of local experience and ongoing 
BRT research.   
 
 
                                                          
54 Nelson, NITC, “Implications for Planning and Development”, pages 116-7  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-22 
 
 
 
II. Comparative Analysis of Albuquerque’s Transit-Oriented Development 
Opportunity    
 
In an initial effort to quantify what the Central Avenue ART would mean to development in 
Albuquerque, members of the city’s chapter of the National Association of Industrial and Office Property 
Developers (NAIOP) projected the service’s development impacts on 12 station areas in the central 
portion of the corridor, including downtown and the other districts in the corridor that are now most 
intensively developed. In a presentation of their findings in January 2014, the NAIOP members 
estimated that the ART would stimulate the redevelopment of some 64 currently vacant acres, with a 
conservatively set floor-to-area ratio of 1.5, resulting in the creation of approximately 3,900 residential 
units; 3,300 office jobs; 2100 retail jobs, and $941 million in new investments.    
 
The Center for Neighborhood Technology (CNT) has projected the approximate value of development in 
the Central Avenue corridor -- along with changes in assessed value, employment and housing units -- 
given implementation of the ART. While CNT’s analysis supports the NAIOP members’ estimates, it is in 
some respects, broader, more nuanced, and directly based on data for achieved development in other 
transit station areas and corridors nationally. The following pages describe the basic logic, key 
assumptions, and results of CNT’s analysis.  
  
A. The Typology of Station Areas 
 
Transit-oriented developments (TODs) are not restricted to the urban core and can occur in 
neighborhoods outside of the downtown. In essence, TOD outside of downtown areas will have the 
essential characteristics of convenient pedestrian access to transit, an integrated mix of land uses, and 
higher density of residents and\or jobs than comparable areas that are not transit served.  However, the 
intensity of development will be lower areas outside of the central business district. Using TOD Typology 
defined in the book New Transit Town: Best Practices in TOD, the 25 planned ART stations are classified 
as one of three TOD station types: Downtown, Urban Neighborhood and Town Center.   
 
Downtowns are high-density neighborhoods with neighborhood serving amenities. They provide access 
to several types of transit, can act as transfer points and attract residents who seek a 24-hour location 
with a variety of cultural amenities. In many cases they are one of the employment centers of the city.  
Urban Neighborhoods are defined as historic neighborhoods that surround the downtown and that 
often are extensions of the downtown street grid and were historically served by streetcar or heavy rail. 
These livable, vibrant neighborhoods today are home to moderate to high density housing with main 
street shopping and civic amenities integrated into the neighborhoods. The urban form supports heavy 
pedestrian activity and can form a transit corridor for bus rapid or light rail transit. 
 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-23 
 
Town Centers are emerging neighborhoods with demand for high quality shopping and transit 
connections to the urban downtown. These regions provide opportunities for dense land uses around 
transit stations that scale down within a half-mile from the stations; multifamily residential buildings 
give way to single family detached homes as you move away from the station. Town Centers typically 
support neighborhood retail along the main street. The following chart summarizes CNT’s grouping of 
the ART station areas into these three categories.  
 
Downtown 
Urban Neighborhood 
Town Center 
1st Street @ Central (across from A.T.C.) 
16th Street 
Atrisco Drive 
1st Street @ Central (in front of A.T.C.) 
Bryn Mawr Drive 
BioPark 
Cedar Street  
Cornell Drive 
Coors Boulevard 
Copper Avenue @ 2nd 
Rio Grande Boulevard 
Eubank Boulevard 
Copper Avenue @ 6th 
San Mateo Boulevard 
Juan Tabo Boulevard 
Gold Avenue @ 6th 
Solano Drive 
Louisiana Boulevard 
University Boulevard 
Washington Street 
Old Coors Drive 
Walter Street 
  
Tramway Boulevard 
  
  
Unser Boulevard 
  
  
Wyoming Boulevard 
 
 
 
 
B. Key Comparisons and Assumptions 
 
Buffers and Assessed Values 
For analytical purposes, the 25 ART stations were grouped into three districts that corresponded to their 
typologies, and a 5/8 mile buffer was created around each of the districts. The 5/8 mile buffer 
corresponds to a half mile walking distance around each station through developed or developable land 
plus allowance for street widths.  Buffers were created for the districts rather than individual station 
areas to avoid double counting those areas within the half mile walking distance of more than one 
station. The three district buffers were overlaid on the Bernalillo County Assessor’s 2015 parcel data and 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-24 
 
the proportional weighted average of assessed value per acre for Commercial, Residential and Vacant 
parcels was calculated.  
 
  
Downtown 
Urban 
Neighborhood 
Town Center 
Commercial Wt. Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$1,463,309 
$756,535 
$431,161 
Residential Wt. Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$1,021,919 
$1,014,705 
$603,376 
Vacant Wt. Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$331,008 
$215,291 
$146,415 
Under-utilized Properties- Commercial Wt. 
Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$410,590 
$273,990 
$198,364 
Under-utilized Properties - Residential Wt. 
Average Assessed Value/Acre 
$157,926 
$175,200 
$100,294 
 
The percentage increase in total assessed values between 2006 & 2015 was calculated for each of the 
three districts and it was assumed that the developed parcels will have the same percentage increase in 
assessed values.  
 
Downtown 
Urban Neighborhood 
Town Center 
Total Assessed Value - 2006 
$1,312,409,823 
$1,577,824,088 
$1,931,696,215 
Total Assessed Value - 2015 
$1,592,921,256 
$2,061,918,052 
$2,362,678,117 
Percent change (2006-2015) 
21.4% 
30.7% 
22.3% 
 
 
 
Vacancy and Under-Utilized Properties 
The number of vacant acres in the 5/8 mile buffer for each of the three districts was calculated using 
vacancy of parcels as indicated in the property class column of Assessor’s data. Overlapping parcels 
were assigned to the denser district (in order of higher density: Downtown, Urban Neighborhood, and 
Town Center). Vacant parcels that were in the following land uses were subtracted: drainage/flood, 
parks/recreation, transportation/utilities and public/institutional. 
  
Under-utilized properties are defined as the parcels in which the land value is greater that the building 
improvements. Parcels with “Commercial or Residential” property class having building improvement 
values less than three-fourths of the land value were extracted (to eliminate overlaps and over-
estimation) as well as parcels with following land uses: drainage/flood, parks/recreation, 
transportation/utilities and public/institutional. Parcels with surface parking lots were identified and half 
were removed from the under-utilized properties category since parking requirements will still need to 
be fulfilled with a mix of parking structures and surface lots. After these considerations were made,  
intuitive estimates were made of the percentages of the remaining  vacant and under-utilized land that 
would be developed, allowing for the possibility that many of these parcels might not be buildable for 
unique reasons. 
 
Downtown 
Urban 
Town Center 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-25 
 
Neighborhood 
Percent vacant land developed 
80% 
80% 
50% 
Percent under-utilized properties developed 
80% 
50% 
33% 
 
TOD Typology/Land Use Mix 
Land use mix in different TOD areas are derived from the Normative Metrics presented in the Center for 
Transit-oriented Development’s (CTOD) Performance-Based Transit-Oriented Development Typology 
Guidebook55.  On the basis of comparing data from hundreds of transit station areas, the Guidebook 
categorizes station areas into three place types: Employment Places, Balanced Places and Residential 
Places. This categorization broadly corresponds to the station area typologies of New Transit Town:  
Downtown:  
Employment Places – Downtown Urban Neighborhood   
Balanced Places – Urban Neighborhood  
Residential Places – Town Center 
 
The Guidebook makes a further differentiation of five levels of intensity of development within each of 
the three broad TOD typologies. For each level, the Guidebook has calculated average numbers of 
workers, residents, and households per acre. The level of intensity is inversely proportional to the 
vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per station area resident. In other words, the lower the average VMT per 
station area resident, the higher is the number of workers, residents, and households per acre. We can 
simplify this finding by expressing it in terms of a five-point scale:  
 
1 – high VMT, low density  
 
2 – high-moderate VMT, low-moderate density  
 
3 – moderate VMT, moderate density  
 
4 – low-moderate VMT, high-moderate density  
 
5 – low VMT, high density  
 
Examining census data for the ART station areas, CNT found that the current densities of its Downtown 
and Urban Neighborhood station areas are roughly a 3.5 on our 5-point scale, while the Town Center 
station areas are about a 2.5 on the 5-point scale. This finding indicates that the densities of the Center 
Avenue Corridor’s  Downtown and Urban Neighborhood station areas are now sufficient to support 
rapid transit, but could be developed more intensively, while the corridor’s Town Centers need some 
further development to reach average densities for US transit station areas.        
Downtown: Employment Places – ART, Average of Low & Low-Mod VMT, 3.5 
Urban Neighborhood: Balanced Places – ART, Average of Low & Low-Mod VMT, 3.5 
Town Center: Residential Places – ART, Average of Low-Mod & Mod VMT, 2.5  
 
                                                          
55 CNT was one of the three founding members of CTOD and the metrics formulated for TOD typology are derived 
from an analysis of approximately 3,760 existing train station areas across 39 regions of the nation. The typologies 
are conservative estimates derived by taking the average values observed in the station areas from the U.S. Census 
and CNT’s Housing and Transportation (H+T®) Affordability Index. 
http://ctod.org/pdfs/2010PerformanceBasedTODTypologyGuidebook.pdf 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-26 
 
Actual average numbers for the Guidebook station area levels and the averages which correspond to 
typical ART station areas are provided in the following table.   
 
 
 
 
  
Downtown - Employment 
Place 
Urban Neighborhood - 
Balanced Place 
Town Center - Residential 
Place 
  
Low-
Mod 
VMT 
Low VMT 
Average 
Low-
Mod 
VMT 
Low 
VMT 
Average 
Mod 
VMT 
Low-
Mod 
VMT 
Average 
Residents 
   
5,103  
   
12,581  
   
8,842  
   
10,732  
   
29,875  
   
20,304  
   
10,229  
   
20,106  
   
15,168  
Workers 
   
29,811  
   
96,725  
   
63,268  
   
11,031  
   
34,280  
   
22,656  
   
2,351  
   
4,612  
   
3,482  
Total 
Intensity 
(workers+resi
dents) 
   
34,914  
   
109,306  
   
72,110  
   
21,763  
   
64,155  
   
42,959  
   
12,580  
24,718 
   
18,649  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Households 
   
2,524  
   
6,828  
   
4,676  
   
4,646  
   
15,466  
   
10,056  
   
3,906  
   
7,684  
   
5,795  
Household 
Size 
1.67 
1.58 
   
1.63  
2.21 
1.95 
   
2.08  
2.62 
   
2.61  
   
2.62  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Gross Density 
(Units/Acre) 
10.3 
28.5 
   
19.4  
16.4 
48.7 
   
32.6  
10.3 
21.6 
   
16.0  
Residential 
Density 
(Units/Acre) 
20.6 
51.4 
   
36.0  
20.9 
55.6 
   
38.3  
12.1 
23.6 
   
17.9  
Block Size 
(Acres) 
6.4 
3.7 
   
5.1  
5.8 
3.7 
   
4.8  
5.7 
4.1 
   
4.9  
 
 
Other figures of interest from the Guidebook data are indications of “Total Intensity” the sum of workers 
plus residents in a station area, and the ratio of workers to residents. CNT has made a broad assumption 
that in the vacant land to be redeveloped within the ART corridor, the ratios of land allotted to 
commercial and residential use will approximate the ratios of workers to residents in a station area. By 
applying these ratios to future residential and commercial land uses (vacant & under-utilized properties 
to be developed) we estimate the following percentages for the uses of newly developed land in ART 
station areas: 
Downtown 
Urban Neighborhood 
Town Center 
% Residential 
20%* 
47% 
81% 
% Commercial 
80%* 
53% 
19% 
* The percentages were tweaked to increase residential from 12% to 20% in keeping with the objective of making 
Albuquerque’s downtown into a 24-hour residential place.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-27 
 
 
Future commercial land uses were further split into office and retail. The proportion of these land uses 
in the future is assumed to be same as the current proportion which was calculated from Albuquerque’s 
current land use. 
 
Office to Retail ratio from current land use 
Downtown 
Urban Neighborhood 
Town Center 
            Office 
0.70 
0.30 
0.20 
            Retail 
0.30 
0.70 
0.80 
 
 
Floor Area Ratio 
Floor area ratios are assumed to be constant in the entire district for each type of development for 
calculation purposes. In reality, densities will be highest in developments surrounding the stations and 
gradually scale done towards the periphery of the 5/8 mile buffer. These estimates are based on the 
anticipated intensities of land development. Actual intensities will be determined by combinations of 
zoning allowances and market forces. CNT’s projections of FAR should be read as such estimates and not 
directly as recommendations for zoning. To the extent that these estimates are considered in 
Albuquerque’s Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) process, a useful question would be, “What 
FAR regulations applied to ART station areas would be conducive to achieving the levels of development 
projected in CNT’s analysis?”    
 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
Downtown 
Urban 
Neighborhood 
Town Center 
Residential 
2.0 
1.3 
0.8 
Commercial office 
2.0 
1.0 
0.5 
Retail  
2.0 
0.5 
0.5 
 
Building Construction 
Building construction costs were derived from the RS Means Building Costs Calculator for the year 2013 
for new construction in Albuquerque. The cost estimates are an average of costs for using Union Labor 
or Open shop.  
 
Downtown 
Cost per sq ft 
Residential (1-3 story building) 
$129.69 
Office (5-10 story building) 
$140.34 
Retail (3 story department store) 
$115.78 
 
Ten percent of the retail developments in the Urban Neighborhood & Town Center are assumed to be 
restaurants. The remaining retail will be a mix of big box and smaller retail stores.  
 
Urban Neighborhood & Town Center 
Cost per sq ft 
Residential (1-3 story building) 
$129.69 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-28 
 
Office (2-4 story building) 
$135.07 
Retail (1 story) - 90% of retail 
$103.31 
Restaurant(1 story) - 10% of retail 
$252.39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Calculations of Potential Development Scale  
 
1. Downtown District 
The downtown district’s eight stations and the 5/8 mile buffer area are seen in the below map. 
Currently, there are 23.2 acres of vacant land and 76.3 acres of under-utilized properties in this district, 
eighty percent of which will be developed in to a denser employment center. Complementary retail 
amenities and dense mixed-use residential uses support the vision of creating a 24-hour downtown.  
 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-29 
 
Downtown 
Ref 
No. 
  
Vacant Acres 
Underutilized 
Properties 
  
Calculation 
Assumptions 
Source 
  
  
A 
B 
  
  
  
  
1 
Downtown Buffer (acres) 
23.2 
76.3 
  
  
  
Assessor's Data 2015 
2 
80%/80% to be developed 
18.5 
61.0 
  
Line 1 * 0.8 
80% of vacant land and underutilized 
properties to be developed 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Residential 
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
Residential Share of 
development 
3.7 
12.2 
  
Line 2 * 0.2 
20% 
TOD Typology 
4 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
7.4 
24.4 
  
Line 3 *2.0 
2.0 floor area ratio 
  
5 
Total Acres 
31.8 
  
  
4A + 4B 
  
  
5 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land – Residential 
31.8 
  
  
Same as Line 5 
  
  
6 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land – Residential 
1,386,425 
  
  
Line 5 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
7 
Value of New Residential 
$31,817,939 
  
  
((Line 4A * 
690,911) + (Line 
4B *863,992)) * 
1.214 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre (vacant) = 
$690,911 (Difference between Residential & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre 
(underutilized) = $863,992 (Difference 
between Residential & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 21.4% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
8 
Number of Units 
1,146 
  
  
Line 5 * 36 
Residential Density (Units/Acre) = 36.0 
TOD Typology 
9 
Number of new residents 
2,169 
  
  
Line 8 * 1.89 
Average Household Size = 1.89 
ACS 2013 
10 
Value of new residential 
construction 
$179,805,417 
  
  
Line 6 * 129.7 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $129.7 
RS Means Estimation for 3 story 
Apartment in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Office 
  
  
  
  
  
  
11 
Office Share of 
development 
10.4 
34.2 
  
Line 2 *0.56 
56% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
12 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
20.8 
68.3 
  
Line 11 *2.0 
2.0 floor area ratio 
  
13 
Total Acres 
89.1 
  
  
12A + 12B 
  
  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-30 
 
14 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land – Office 
89.1 
  
  
Same as Line 13 
  
  
15 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land – Office 
3,881,989 
  
  
Line 14 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
16 
Value of New Office 
$115,875,312 
  
  
((Line 12A * 
1,132,301) + 
(Line 12B 
*1,052,719)) * 
1.214 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) 
= $1,132, 301 (Difference between 
Commercial & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) 
= $1,052, 719 (Difference between 
Commercial & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 21.4% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
17 
Jobs Created- Office 
5,108 
  
  
Line 15/760 
1 employee per 760 sq ft 
  
18 
Value of new office 
construction 
$544,798,352 
  
  
Line 15 * $140.3 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $140.3 
RS Means Estimation for Office 
building in ABQ Downtown 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Retail 
  
  
  
  
  
  
19 
Retail Share of 
development 
4.5 
14.6 
  
Line 2 * 0.24 
24% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
20 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
8.9 
29.3 
  
Line 19 * 2.0 
2.0 floor area ratio 
  
21 
Total Acres 
38.2 
  
  
20A + 20B 
  
  
22 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land – Retail 
38.2 
  
  
Same as line 22 
  
  
23 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land – Retail 
1,663,710 
  
  
Line 22 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
24 
Value of New Retail 
$49,660,848 
  
  
((Line 20A * 
1,132,301) + 
(Line 20B 
*1,052,719))*1.
214 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) 
= $1,132, 301 (Difference between 
Commercial & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) 
= $1,052, 719 (Difference between 
Commercial & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 21.4% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
25 
Jobs Created- Retail 
1,664 
  
  
Line 23/1000 
1 employee per 1,000 sq ft 
  
26 
Value of new retail 
construction 
$192,615,981 
  
  
Line 23 * $115.8 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $115.8 
RS Means Estimation for  3 story 
department store in ABQ Downtown 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-31 
 
2. Urban Neighborhood District 
 
 
The eight stations and their corresponding 5/8 mile buffers make up the Urban Neighborhood District. 
There are 108.5 acres (5% of the district) of vacant land and under-utilized properties, of which 62.3 
acres is projected to be developed into an equal mix of residential and retail land uses. The assumed 
floor area ratio of 1.3 accounts for a variety of residential types: multi-family, townhomes, single family. 
Offices, retail stores and restaurants will have lower floor area ratios to accommodate parking needs.


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-32 
 
Urban Neighborhood 
Ref 
No. 
  
Vacant Acres 
Underutilize
d Properties 
  
Calculation 
Assumptions 
Source 
  
  
A 
B 
  
  
  
  
1 
Downtown Buffer (acres) 
27.0 
81.5 
  
  
  
Assessor's Data 2015 
2 
80%/50% to be developed 
21.6 
40.8 
  
Line 1A * 0.8 & 
Line 1B * 0.5 
80% of vacant land and 50%  of underutilized 
properties to be developed 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Residential 
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
Residential Share of 
development 
10.0 
19.0 
  
Line 2 * 0.47 
47% 
TOD Typology 
4 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
13.1 
24.7 
  
Line 3 *1.3 
1.3 floor area ratio 
  
5 
Total Acres 
37.7 
  
  
4A + 4B 
  
  
5 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Residential 
37.7 
  
  
Same as Line 5 
  
  
6 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Residential 
1,644,119 
  
  
Line 5 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
7 
Value of New Residential 
$40,723,354 
  
  
((Line 4A * 
799,414) + 
(Line 4B 
*839,506)) * 
1.307 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre (vacant) = 
$799,414 (Difference between Residential & Vacant 
value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre (underutilized) 
= $839,506 (Difference between Residential & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 2006 
to 2015 = 30.7% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
8 
Number of Units 
1,444 
  
  
Line 5 * 38.3 
Residential Density (Units/Acre) = 38.3 
TOD Typology 
9 
Number of new residents 
3,003 
  
  
Line 8 * 2.08 
Average Household Size = 2.08 
TOD Typology 
10 
Value of new residential 
construction 
$213,225,792 
  
  
Line 6 * 129.7 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $129.7 
RS Means Estimation for 3 story 
Apartment in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Office 
  
  
  
  
  
  
11 
Office Share of 
development 
3.5 
6.5 
  
Line 2 *0.16 
16% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
12 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
3.5 
6.5 
  
Line 11 *1.0 
1.0 floor area ratio 
  
13 
Total Acres 
10.0 
  
  
12A + 12B 
  
  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-33 
 
14 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Office 
10.0 
  
  
Same as Line 
13 
  
  
15 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Office 
435,356 
  
  
Line 14 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
16 
Value of New Office 
$6,567,751 
  
  
((Line 12A * 
541,244) + 
(Line 12B 
*482,545))*1.3
07 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$541,244 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$482,545 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 2006 
to 2015 = 30.7% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
17 
Jobs Created- Office 
573 
  
  
Line 15/762 
1 employee per 760 sq ft 
  
18 
Value of new office 
construction 
$58,801,292 
  
  
Line 15 * 
$135.1 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $135.1 
RS Means Estimation for 2-4 story 
Office building in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Retail 
  
  
  
  
  
  
19 
Retail Share of 
development 
8.0 
15.1 
  
Line 2 * 0.37 
37% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
20 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
4.0 
7.5 
  
Line 19 * 0.5 
0.5 floor area ratio 
  
21 
Total Acres 
11.5 
  
  
20A + 20B 
  
  
22 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Retail 
11.5 
  
  
Same as line 22 
  
  
23 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Retail 
502,440 
  
  
Line 22 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
24 
Value of New Retail 
$7,579,785 
  
  
((Line 20A * 
541,244) + 
(Line 20B 
*482,545)) * 
1.307 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$541,244 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$482,545 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 2006 
to 2015 = 30.7% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
25 
Jobs Created- Retail 
502 
  
  
Line 23/1000 
1 employee per 1,000 sq ft 
  
26 
Value of new retail 
construction 
$59,397,202 
  
  
(Line 23 * 0.9 * 
$103.3) + (Line 
23 * 0.1 * 
$252.4) 
Building Cost per Sq Ft for Retail = $103.3 (90%)           
Building Cost per Sq Ft for Restaurant = $252.4 
(10%) 
RS Means Estimation for Retail 
Store & Restaurant in ABQ 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-34 
 
3. Town Center District 
 
 
 
The Town Center District is the largest district in size – over 5,000 acres encompassing ten stations and 
their buffer areas. Vacant and under-utilized properties make up 20% of this district. It has several auto-
oriented shopping centers and land use patterns are suburban in character with largely single-family and 
some multi-family housing. The district is projected to develop at a slower pace than the other two 
districts. Only 50% of the vacant parcels and one-third of the under-utilized properties are anticipated to 
develop in the upcoming years. Future development is assumed to preserve the residential character of 
the district with opportunities for more moderate density housing and complemented with 
neighborhood retail.  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-35 
 
Town Center 
Ref 
No. 
  
Vacant Acres 
Underutilize
d Properties 
  
Calculation 
Assumptions 
Source 
  
  
A 
B 
  
  
  
  
1 
Downtown Buffer (acres) 
387.9 
630.2 
  
  
  
Assessor's Data 2015 
2 
50%/33% to be 
developed 
193.9 
209.9 
  
Line 1A * 0.5 & 
Line 1B * 0.33 
50% of vacant land and 33%  of underutilized 
properties to be developed 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Residential 
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
Residential Share of 
development 
157.7 
170.7 
  
Line 2 * 0.81 
81% 
TOD Typology 
4 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
126.2 
136.5 
  
Line 3 *0.8 
0.8 floor area ratio 
  
5 
Total Acres 
262.7 
  
  
4A + 4B 
  
  
5 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Residential 
262.7 
  
  
Same as Line 5 
  
  
6 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Residential 
11,444,063 
  
  
Line 5 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
7 
Value of New Residential 
$154,540,043 
  
  
((Line 4A * 
456,961) + 
(Line 4B 
*503,082)) * 
1.223 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre (vacant) = 
$456,961 (Difference between Residential & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Residential Value per acre 
(underutilized) = $503,082 (Difference between 
Residential & Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 22.3% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
8 
Number of Units 
4,690 
  
  
Line 5 * 17.9 
Residential Density (Units/Acre) = 17.9 
TOD Typology 
9 
Number of new residents 
12,263 
  
  
Line 8 * 2.62 
Average Household Size = 2.62 
TOD Typology 
10 
Value of new residential 
construction 
$1,484,180,548 
  
  
Line 6 * 129.7 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $129.7 
RS Means Estimation for 3 story 
Apartment in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Office 
  
  
  
  
  
  
11 
Office Share of 
development 
7.2 
7.8 
  
Line 2 *0.037 
3.7% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
12 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
3.6 
3.9 
  
Line 11 *0.5 
0.5 floor area ratio 
  
13 
Total Acres 
7.5 
  
  
12A + 12B 
  
  


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-36 
 
14 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Office 
7.5 
  
  
Same as Line 
13 
  
  
15 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Office 
328,354 
  
  
Line 14 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
16 
Value of New Office 
$2,376,378 
  
  
((Line 12A * 
284,746) + 
(Line 12B 
*232,798)) * 
1.223 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$284,746 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$232,798(Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 22.3% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
17 
Jobs Created- Office 
432 
  
  
Line 15/760 
1 employee per 380 sq ft 
  
18 
Value of new office 
construction 
$44,349,168 
  
  
Line 15 * 
$135.1 
Building Cost per Sq Ft = $135.1 
RS Means Estimation for 2-4 story 
Office building in ABQ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Retail 
  
  
  
  
  
  
19 
Retail Share of 
development 
29.0 
31.3 
  
Line 2 * 0.149 
14.9% 
TOD Typology; ABQ Land Use 
20 
Acres developed (FAR 
included) 
14.5 
15.7 
  
Line 19 * 0.5 
0.5 floor area ratio 
  
21 
Total Acres 
30.2 
  
  
20A + 20B 
  
  
22 
Acres Added from Vacant 
Land - Retail 
30.2 
  
  
Same as line 22 
  
  
23 
Sq Ft Added from Vacant 
Land - Retail 
1,313,417 
  
  
Line 22 *43560 
1 acre = 43,560 square feet 
  
24 
Value of New Retail 
$9,505,513 
  
  
((Line 20A * 
456,961) + 
(Line 20 B 
*503,082)) * 
1.223 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$284,746 (Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Adjusted Commercial Value per acre (vacant) = 
$232,798(Difference between Commercial & 
Vacant value per acre) 
Assessor's Data 2015 
Total Assessed Value - Percent increase from 
2006 to 2015 = 22.3% 
Assessor's Data - 2006 & 2015 
25 
Jobs Created- Retail 
1,313 
  
  
Line 23/1000 
1 employee per 1,000 sq ft 
  
26 
Value of new retail 
construction 
$155,268,879 
  
  
(Line 23 * 0.9 * 
$103.3) + (Line 
23 * 0.1 * 
$252.4) 
Building Cost per Sq Ft for Retail = $103.3 (90%)      
Building Cost per Sq Ft for Restaurant = $252.4 
(10%) 
RS Means Estimation for Retail Store & 
Restaurant in ABQ 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-37 
 
III. Findings and Recommendations  
 
A. Findings 
 
1. Discussion of Findings  
The proposed ART system will incorporate virtually all of the features that transit-oriented development 
research, including BRT studies, has shown are characteristic of transit systems that spur economic 
development:  
• 
The technical features of the ART – including its design, equipment, and service plan -- ensure 
speed, reliability, and convenience for its customers.  
• 
The ART route -- virtually the entire length of Central Avenue -- connects relatively dense 
residential neighborhoods to centers of employment, vital services, and entertainment.  
• 
In combination the ART’s technical characteristics and route will provide reliable 
accessibility to other transit services, including multiple north-south bus routes.  
• 
The ART will make a substantive, in some cases essential, contribution to numerous local 
government and institutional plans to revitalize Albuquerque’s economy and protect its 
environment, including the Preferred Scenario of the regional Long Range Transportation 
Plan, the expansion of the UNM Hospital and campus, ABQ the Plan, Innovate ABQ, STC.UNM 
(UNM technology transfer non-profit organization), the Downtown ABQ Mainstreet Initiative56 
and the Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan. Accordingly, local government is fully 
committed to support the ART, in part through the use of promotional efforts and incentives 
that have been applied in Albuquerque’s MRA program, and in part by establishing a consistent 
zoning environment that will encourage intensive development in transit corridors through the 
Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) process.  
• 
The private market has shown its readiness to invest in the ART corridor through some 17 
mixed-use, multifamily building, or commercial projects that have been built in this corridor 
within the last three years, with at least 12 additional projects proposed. Several developers of 
these projects have expressed their expectation that the ART will make an important 
contribution to the success of their investments.  
 
In light of these facts, CNT conservatively projects that the ART will stimulate the redevelopment of 80% 
of the vacant or severely under-utilized real estate parcels within a 5/8 mile radius of its Central Avenue 
route. In this projection CNT anticipates that the type of uses to which these properties will be  
redeveloped will mirror current land use in the same station areas and that the level of intensity to 
which these properties will be redeveloped will correspond to the middle range of fixed guideway 
transit station areas with these types of land use, per national data sets. These projected developments 
could occur over period as brief as 10 or as long as 20 years. The results of these projections are 
summarized on the following table.  
 
                                                          
56 Downtown ABQ Mainstreet Initiative, http://www.abqmainstreet.org. Accessed on Dec. 21, 2015. 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  Summary of Projected New Development Linked to Implementation of the ART  
Station Areas 
Assessed Value 
Residents 
Residential 
Units 
Office 
Jobs  
Retail 
Jobs 
Development Value 
Downtown  
 $        197,359,099  
           
2,169  
            
1,146  
     
5,108  
       
1,664  
 $                917,219,750  
Urban 
Neighborhoods 
 $          54,870,890  
           
3,003  
            
1,444  
        
573  
   502  
 $                331,424,286  
Town Center  
 $        166,421,934  
         
12,263  
            
4,690  
        
432  
       
1,313  
 $             1,683,798,595  
Total 
 $        418,646,923  
         
17,435  
            
7,280  
     
6,113  
       
3,479  
 $             2,932,442,631  
 
Through the limited scope of CNT’s assignment, these projected outcomes reflect only direct 
development from the conversion of vacant and under-utilized properties to productive use. This 
analysis does not calculate additions to public revenues through property taxes on increased assessed 
value or sales taxes generated by new or expanded businesses and their employees. The analysis also 
does not include estimates of induced or indirect benefits, which would require the application of an 
econometric model.  
 
The scale of the direct development projected here would have a significant impact on Albuquerque’s 
land use, travel patterns, and economy. The level of these projections might be compared to the 
developments projected by members of Albuquerque’s chapter of NAIOP, in the January 2014 
presentation noted earlier, which included $941m in development value, 3,900 residential units, 3,300 
office jobs, and 2,100 retail jobs. The NAIOP members’ projections were based on the development of 
64 specific locations, most of which front directly on Central Avenue, rather than considering the 
entire 5/8 mile radius buffer around Central; it was also limited to Downtown and Urban 
Neighborhood station areas and did not include the Town Center station areas. The NAIOP members’ 
projections also did not have the benefit of extensive data from fixed guideway station areas around 
the nation that were instrumental in framing CNT’s projection assumptions.  
 
One aspect of this comparison in which the NAIOP members’ projections may be more predictive than 
CNT’s is in the number of residential units to be constructed in Downtown and Urban Neighborhood 
station areas. Although CNT’s projections of Downtown station area housing are more reflective of 
the most recent data for the built environment of US station areas, national market demand for 
higher levels of Downtown housing have been documented, and a number of Downtown and Urban 
Neighborhood TOD projects now in active development are delivering high concentrations of 
residential units. If NAIOP members, who are actually building projects in Albuquerque, are correct in 
thinking that higher levels of residential units will be developed in central portions of the ART corridor, 
this would be a positive outcome for travel patterns and economic development in Albuquerque.   
 
ART corridor projections should also be considered in the context of developments in other cities 
discussed in Section I.G. of this report. While $2.9b in anticipated development investment is a figure 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-39 
 
that triggers a deep intake of breath, it is in the midrange of reported development investments 
linked to comparable BRT and other fixed guideway systems, sometimes in fair to weak markets, 
sometimes with less technically advanced systems than the proposed ART, and realized within shorter 
periods of time than CNT has projected.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A further important consideration is the extent to which projected direct development impacts of the 
ART will contribute to the realization of the Preferred Scenario in MRCOG’s Long Range Transportation 
Plan for the Albuquerque region.  As noted earlier, the Preferred Scenario represents the Albuquerque 
metropolitan area’s best strategy for solving its transportation congestion and air quality problems and 
supporting the development of its economy to a competitive 21st Century level. To achieve some key 
objectives of the Preferred Scenario, which are noted in the following table, the region will need to 
locate approximately 23,000 additional households and create some 30,000 jobs within a quarter mile of 
transit stations by the Year 2040. The projections of this report concern a 5/8 mile buffer around the 
ART route, but the large bulk of the expected development will occur within a quarter mile of the ART 
stations. So by a rough approximation, nearly 30% of the development required to meet the Preferred 
Scenario’s objectives will be achieved when the development projected for the ART corridor is realized.   
 
  
 
Projected ART-Linked Development & Preferred Scenario Requirements57 
Required 
Development 
within Transit 
Station Areas 
2012 
2040 
Required 
Development 
ART-Linked 
Projected 
Development 
ART-Linked 
Development  
Contribution 
Households  
19646 
43151 
23505 
7280 
31% 
Jobs 
97153 
127421 
30268 
9592 
32% 
 
Thirty percent of required regional development in one corridor over a 10 to 20 year period is certainly a 
major contribution to the Preferred Scenario. However, this is the corridor that includes downtown 
Albuquerque and a number of the region’s primary employment and activity institutions, and it is the 
only corridor in the region for which true rapid transit service has been proposed in detail. To achieve 
the objectives of the Preferred Scenario, every piece of projected development in the ART corridor must 
be realized as quickly as possible, and accomplishments within this corridor must give rise to additional 
enhanced transit services and linked development.   
 
2. Summary of Findings      
CNT’s recommendations are driven by its basic findings:  
(1) The ART – as currently proposed with its technical and service characteristics, route, and 
constructive interface with other key development initiatives – is poised to stimulate economic 
development within a 5/8 mile buffer around Central Avenue that includes:  
• 
$2.9b in the value of new development  
                                                          
57 MRCOG, “2040 Long Range Metropolitan Transportation Plan”,  Figures drawn from Table 2-12: Select 
Performance Measures, 2012, 2040 Trend and Preferred Scenarios http://www.mrcog-
nm.gov/transportation/metro-planning/long-range-mtp   


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-40 
 
• 
$418m in increased assessed property value  
• 
7,280 new residential units  
• 
9,592 new jobs  
(2) The features of the proposed ART that create its value are interdependent, e.g.:  
• 
The assets and development potential of the Central Avenue route justify the public investment 
in the ART’s technical features, and these features are essential to a qualitative improvement in 
transit service that will incentivize further development in the Central Avenue corridor.   
• 
The nine-mile route linking communities west of the Rio Grande to Albuquerque’s downtown 
are essential to achieving anticipated congestion mitigation, and the ridership drawn east by the 
ART will add vitality to the city’s downtown and urban neighborhoods.  
• 
The ART will provide a basic amenity for the urban work environment and lifestyle that is a 
requirement for the success of such initiatives as Innovate ABQ and technology sharing 
programs of the UNM, and the success of these initiatives will drive the ridership of the ART.      
(3)  Substantial as development directly linked to the ART is projected to be, this development alone 
will not be sufficient to achieve the growth in transit station areas required by the Preferred 
Scenario of MRCOG’s Long Range Transportation Plan. To achieve substantive regional change, the 
impact of the ART will need to be felt as early as possible, and it will need to enhance currently 
interconnecting transit services and give rise to others.   
 
B.  Recommendations   
 
Protect the integrity of the ART plan and implement the full service as proposed.  In resolving any issues 
related to the implementation of a transit service in a busy urban corridor, such as parking or left turn 
options at specific locations, chose solutions that do not the compromise service capabilities of the ART. 
Certainly reject any misguided suggestion to deviate the route of the ART from the “truly central” 
Central Avenue corridor that is essential for the synergy between rapid transit service and a directly 
served healthy market. Building and operating the full ART as proposed should not be problematic if 
complete funding can be secured by a pending federal Small Starts grant and local funds now committed 
as a match. However, if additional funds are needed, these should be sought through other federal grant 
programs and local sources. If necessary, prudent borrowing through federal programs that are readily 
available during 2016 should be used. Any cuts in operating capacity, service, or route which would 
undermine the connectivity or reliability of the ART should be considered only as a last resort. Such 
diminutions can easily lead to public perceptions that the transit service is not valuable, impressions that 
could result in decreased ridership and reduced private investment in the transit corridor, driving a 
downward cycle that would be difficult to reverse.  
 
A corollary to implementing the entire ART as planned is to implement it swiftly. The experience of other 
cities shows that substantial private investments in transit corridor housing and businesses may be 
expected as soon as the plans for a fixed guideway transit service are definitely determined. The 
economic impacts from a transit service investment take decades to fully unfold. The sooner a project 


DRAFT: The Scale of the Prize 
 
C-41 
 
begins, the sooner it will yield economic benefits and provide a basis for extending complimentary 
transit services and transit-oriented development corridors.     
 
Accelerate Development of the Second ART Line and Ancillary Services: The envisioned second ART 
line, which will link the Albuquerque International Sunport  and a large section of the city to Downtown 
and the University of New Mexico, should be implemented with all possible speed. The value of a transit 
system depends to a large degree in its connectivity. To the extent that the ART offers access to more 
destinations it will be more widely used and the value of properties with access to it will grow. For the 
same reason connections from ART stations via conventional bus service or shuttle services to major 
retail or commercial centers should be studied and optimized whenever possible. Possible funding 
mechanisms for such service may be Transportation Management Associations (TMAs) – associations of 
employers that contribute financially to services that benefit their workers and enlarge their job or 
customer pool.   
 
Prioritize Compatible Zoning, Economic Development Programs, and Mixed-Income Community 
Development in the ART Corridor.  While development projects in the Central Avenue – ART Corridor 
will enjoy strategic advantages from the concentration of existing businesses and institutions and from  
the ART service, these projects will require public sector support, and such support can contribute to the 
equitable distribution of development benefits. 
• 
Fundamentally, development projects in the corridor should have by right zoning that permits 
construction at the level of density appropriate to Downtown, Urban Neighborhood, or Town Center 
transit station areas. Such density should be accompanies by building standards and public 
investments that create pedestrian-friendly environments and a sense of place in transit-served 
neighborhoods. Ensuring such zoning and public space compatibility should be a principal objective 
of Albuquerque’s Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) process.  
• 
Recognizing that economic development assistance in the ART corridor is likely to generate success 
and yield regional benefits from creating housing and jobs in transit-served locations, the economic 
development programs of the region should coordinate tax incentives, low-interest financing, 
workforce training, and other enterprise support programs to ensure the development of ART 
station areas.  
• 
City and regional planners should also expect that property values in ART neighborhoods will rise, 
potentially leading to the displacement of some lower-income households but also creating 
opportunities to establish thriving mixed income communities in keeping with HUD’s Affirmatively 
Furthering Fair Housing guidelines. By ensuring that residential developments contain a mix of 
market rate and affordable units, considering the development of land trusts in selected locations, 
and focusing job training and placement efforts to aid residents in filling the jobs generated in the 
corridor, public initiatives can help to deliver the benefits of ART-linked development to all local 
residents.  
 
 
 


 
D-1 
Appendix D 
 
City’s TOD Planning Grant Application 
 
Applicant and Proposal Profile 
(Pilot Program for Transit-Oriented Development Planning)   
   
Section I. Applicant Information 
Is this a resubmission due to an invalid/error message from FTA?   Yes        
√   No  
Organization Legal Name: City of Albuquerque 
FTA Recipient ID number:    1523 
  
Section II. Comprehensive Planning Project Background 
(Changes from original submission are in green throughout) 
  
Project Title:  TOD Planning for Albuquerque’s Central Avenue Corridor (Descriptive title of this project) 
  
Specify the transit project with which the proposed comprehensive planning work is associated. 
Provide the URL of a map of the transit project corridor if available: 
Central Avenue Corridor Bus Rapid Transit Project: http://bit.ly/1s05T30 , locally referred to as the 
Albuquerque Rapid Transit or “ART” project 
  
ID boundaries of the portion of the transit project corridor the proposed planning work wiII address: 
Planning work will address the entire transit project corridor, i.e., an approximately 17-mile stretch of 
Central Avenue (formerly Route 66). It includes a study area approximately one-mile wide along the 
corridor, from Tramway Boulevard on the east to Unser on the west. The corridor intersects 
Downtown,  Old Town, multiple Regional Employment Centers (e.g. Presbyterian Hospital, UNM 
Campus, etc.), Urban Center, and Activity Centers. It also includes the ART north-south service 
between Central Avenue and Uptown via Louisiana Boulevard. 
  
Summarize the work plan for the comprehensive planning work by task. Be sure to address: 
- How the work plan addresses all six aspects of the general authority stipulated in MAP-21 Section 
20005(b)(2) 
-The schedule for each task, major milestones and the overall planning effort 
- Partner entities (including key staff with job titles) & their roles and responsibilities for each task 
- Whether the proposed work will examine innovative financial tools such as value capture 
- Final deliverables 
  
An approximately two yearlong revamp of the City of Albuquerque’s Comp Plan and Zoning Code is 
underway in a process called “ABC->Z”. TOD planning for the Central Avenue corridor will complement  
the Presidential recommendation of funding, and the anticipated award of, a Small Starts grant for the 


 
D-2 
Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART) BRT project. That planning effort will inform and support efforts along 
a second transit corridor (University Avenue) in which a second BRT line connecting the airport to the 
UNM Health Sciences Center is anticipated by Rio Metro (the project lead) to move to design 
development by the summer of 2016.  
 
As ABC->Z develops, TOD planning work will engage stakeholders, such as the UNM school of 
Architecture and Planning, local trade associations for developers, apartment owners & managers, 
community and place-based organization and other key stakeholders, to “field test”  emerging 
regulations in the actual transit corridor(s). This process will reveal issues and opportunities and enable 
appropriate revisions before the regulations are finalized. New goals, policies, and recommended capital 
projects will encourage economic development and enhanced transit service within the corridor, with 
implementation that includes potential value capture tools to foster reinvestment in infrastructure 
improvements overtime. The new zoning code (Integrated Development Ordinance or IDO ) wiII address 
economic development, ridership, and mode choice  through zone changes, development incentives for 
TOD development, and complete street standards to enable mixed-use development and increase 
allowable densities within the corridor.  The work plan includes robust private sector participation and 
coordination with private developers, business and institutional organizations (NAIOP, Urban Land 
Institute, and Chambers of Commerce), and affordable housing agencies to remove barriers to TOD, 
provide meaningful incentives and/or public-private partnerships, and catalyze private investment. 
(MAP-21 Section 20005(b)(2)(A,D,& F)) 
  
The project facilitates multimodal connectivity and accessibility by coordinating with regional long-range 
transportation planning and identifying/prioritizing infrastructure improvements needed to enhance 
pedestrian and bicycle access to and within the corridor in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and 
with changing requirements for multi-modal cross sections based on the character and context of the 
built environment in the IDO.(MAP-21 Section 20005(b)(2)(B, C, & E)) 
  
The City of Albuquerque Economic Development Department will provide overall coordination for this 
project, in close collaboration with the City’s Transit Department (ABQ Ride) and other departments 
which will take the lead on various aspects of the TOD planning in addition to their own respective 
leadership of the two major work efforts already in process: the BRT construction itself (led by Transit) 
and the ABC->Z process (led by Planning). 
 
Programmatically, a “Corridors Initiative” has been created to advance TOD planning across agencies 
and community partners--including both those in the Central Corridor, and along University Boulevard 
which will likely be the location of Albuquerque’s second BRT in a few years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
D-3 
Project Partners Among City Departments 
 
Economic Development 
While the different departments will take the lead on various aspects of the TOD planning grant, the 
Economic Development Department will provide coordination for this grant’s transit oriented 
development focus.    
-Gary Oppedahl, Director, (Primary role: Communitywide Champion) 
-Deirdre Firth, Deputy Director, (Internal Cross-Departmental Champion) 
-Brian Reilly, ABQ Corridors Initiative (Lead Staff) 
-Vanessa Roanhorse, Team Leader, Small Business Resource Collaborative  
 
Transit 
ABQ RIDE is the lead on the construction of the Albuquerque Rapid Transit project, upon which this TOD 
planning effort rests. Within the planning grant, ABQ Ride will be responsible for all grant reporting and 
expenditure monitoring, as well as be a departmental partner on this project, assisting the land use 
development and planning effort related to the augmentation of the ART project, namely the station 
area planning and analysis, infrastructure improvements, capital improvements implementation, and 
public involvement. 
-Dayna Crawford, Deputy Director (Key ART interface) 
-Lawrence Kline FAICP and Andrew de Garmo, Principal Planners (station area land use and transit 
connectivity leads, respectively) 
-Katherine Cordova, Outreach Specialist (Community Engagement lead) 
-Vanessa Baca, Marketing Manager (Transit marketing lead) 
 
Planning 
This department is the lead on the revision of the City’s Comprehensive Plan (Comp Plan), ABC->Z, and 
the overhaul of the existing zoning code into an Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO). Through close 
coordination and collaboration with this TOD planning grant, these documents will be modified during 
the review and approval process to ensure the City’s regulatory structure not only supports but guides 
development in these corridors toward successful TOD outcomes. 
-Russell Brito, Manager (Key interface for all regulation and permitting, including property acquisition) 
-Rebecca Velarde, Manager, Municipal Redevelopment Authority (Disposition of MR properties in 
Corridor) 
-Mikaela Renz-Whitmore, Terra Reed, Planners (Leads on Comp Plan/IDO Key staff interface with TOD 
team and targeted stakeholders for outreach efforts, respectively) 
-Linda Rumpf, Planner (Route 66 Action Plan project manager, Corridor institutional and key partner 
relationship manager) 
  
Family and Community Services 
This department is the City’s Block Grant and anti-poverty funds administrator and will collaborate with 
the TOD planning on affordable housing issues and funding streams. This department will help with our 
efforts to mitigate gentrification and displacement throughout this process.  


 
D-4 
-Doug Chaplin, Director (Lead strategist on funding policy and administration) 
-Valerie Bargas, Division Manager (UDAG and similar program funding manager) 
-Rick Giron II, Project Manager Community Services (Housing project financing) 
 
 
Highlights of changes since original submission: 
● Planning efforts are now oriented towards achieving identified $2 billion reinvestment potential 
and $1 billion in savings to households identified by an unprecedented county-wide 10 year 
property value study by the Center for Neighborhood Technology. 
● Stronger and deeper public engagement and “civic infrastructure” strengthening (such as use of 
place-based partners, Community Fellows, community facilitation training.). 
● The 11,000-acre Central Avenue Corridor remains the focus of the work, but will also include the 
ART route to/from Uptown, a fast growing primary regional office and retail market. 
● City, MPO and other agency staff will also coordinate and share information with the University 
Avenue Corridor proposal to the degree resources allow. 
● TOD planning will be closely coordinated with ABC->Z IDO approvals to “field test” regulations as 
they go through the review and approval process for inclusion in the zoning code. 
● Stronger reliance on staff across departments to accomplish the work, strengthen long term 
relationships among partners and agencies, and embed plans into city departments and ways of 
doing business.  
● Background studies will precede and inform consultant-led station area planning in Task 2.0. 
● Time frames assuming final approvals allow a July 2016 start. 
  
  
  
 
 


 
D-5 
ORIGINAL SUBMISSION 
CURRENT  SUBMISSION 
Task 0.0 Stakeholder Cultivation, 
Strengthening of Civic Infrastructure, 
Preparatory Studies (Jun-Oct 2016) 
  
0.0 Complete and issue needed RFPs and 
procurement, execute needed contracts 
0.1 Preliminary Stakeholder Engagement  and 
academic/research support via a one-year 
MOU with UNM 
0.2 GIS data preparation and community 
mapping support 
0.3 Community facilitator training & public 
storytelling infrastructure; identification of up 
to five Community Fellows  
Background studies: 
0.4 Construction cost report [Final Deliverable] 
0.5 Public sector financial ROI model [Final 
Deliverable] (incorporating job density and tax 
value per acre to complement other local 
measures, and supporting value capture 
exploration) 
0.6 Gentrification report [Final Deliverable]: 
Analyze and identify areas in the corridor likely 
to experience gentrification. Recommend 
potential mitigation measures, and other 
policy/regulation changes based on best 
practice research and inputs from 
neighborhoods and housing agencies and 
advocates. 
0.7 Infrastructure needs report [Final 
Deliverable]: Analyze and identify 
infrastructure needed to support TOD 
(selected utilities capacity, etc.) in priority 
redevelopment areas. 
  
TASK 1.0 PROJECT KICKOFF (January- April 
2015) 
  
1.1 Confirm work plan, schedule, 
Task 1.0 Partner Organization and Planning 
Firm Consultations (Jul 2016-Jan 2017) 
 
1.1 Confirm work plan, schedule, 


 
D-6 
roles/responsibilities, and public engagement 
strategy. 
  
1.2 Research best practices for TOD & zoning, 
multimodal transportation standards, 
innovative financial tools, and gentrification 
mitigation. 
  
1.3 Compile baseline data and create profiles 
for transit station areas, corridor segments, 
and Activity Centers 
  
1.4 Coordinate with other planning efforts 
(e.g., Central Avenue BRT project; the 2040 
MTP's preferred scenario, Climate Change 
Futures model, and Long Range Transportation 
System and Transit System maps; Innovation 
Corridor public-private partnership; 
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency plans, 
etc.). 
  
 
 
 
1.5 Engage stakeholders throughout the 
corridor  through walking, biking, and transit 
tours; interviews  with developers, property 
owners, and institutions; focus groups with 
open space/parks, health, bike and pedestrian, 
homeless, and physical disability advocates, 
housing agencies, and business and developer 
groups (NAIOP,ULI, Chambers of Commerce); 
public workshops; neighborhood association 
meetings; and moderated online forums 
(Milestone- April 2015). 
  
roles/responsibilities and public engagement 
strategy 
 
1.2 Research best practices for TOD & Zoning, 
multimodal transportation standards, 
innovative finance tools, and gentrification 
mitigation 
 
1.3 Compile baseline data and create profiles 
for transit station areas, corridor segments, 
and Activity Centers 
  
1.4 Coordinate with other long range planning 
efforts (e.g., Central Avenue BRT project; the 
2040 MTP's Preferred Scenario, Climate 
Change Futures Model, and Long Range 
Transportation System and Transit System 
maps; Innovation Corridor public-private 
partnership; Metropolitan Redevelopment 
Agency plans, 2030 District, Complete Streets 
Ordinance, etc.). & within capacity constraints 
the University Boulevard transit corridor 
project. 
 
1.5 Engage stakeholders throughout the 
corridor through walking, biking, and transit 
tours; interviews with developers, property 
owners, and institutions; focus groups with 
open space/parks, public health, bike and 
pedestrian, homeless, and physical disability 
advocates, housing agencies, and business and 
developer groups (NAIOP,ULI, Chambers of 
Commerce); public workshops; neighborhood 
association meetings; and online forums 
(Milestone-Nov 2016). 
TASK 2.0 VISION & IMPLEMENTATION 
STRATEGIES (March-September 2015) 
  
 
  
Task 2.0  Corridor Visioning, Station Area 
Engagement, Planning and Priority Consensus 
Building (Aug 2016-Apr 2017) 
 


 
D-7 
2.1 Create a community inventory of existing 
/desired character in each corridor segment 
and activity center based on plans, 
development trends, and accessibility/facilities, 
for all transport modes. Recommend policy and 
regulatory changes and/or infrastructure 
needs. Gather data and analyses with 
stakeholders via tours, photo documentation, 
focus groups, etc. 
  
2.2 Calibrate MPO’s land use and 
transportation models with land development 
policies, zoning , transportation standards, and 
market conditions to understand the impacts 
of potential changes on the transportation 
network. Recommend changes to goals, 
policies, capital projects (infrastructure, 
affordable housing, etc) zoning and 
transportation standards] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Financial Strategies Report (Final 
Deliverable): Analyze and identify areas in the 
corridor  with high potential for value capture, 
development incentives, and other innovative 
financial tools based on tasks 1.2 and 2.1. 
 
2.4 Gentrification Report (Final Deliverable): 
Analyze and identify areas in the corridor  likely 
to experience gentrification. Recommend 
potential mitigation measures and/or 
policy/regulation changes based on best 
practices research and input from 
neighborhoods and housing agencies and 
2.1 Create a community inventory of existing 
/desired character in each corridor segment 
and activity center based on plans, 
development trends, and 
accessibility/facilities, for all transportation 
modes. Recommend policy and regulatory 
changes and/or infrastructure needs. Gather 
data and analyses with stakeholders via tours, 
photo documentation, focus groups, etc. 
 
2.2  Review and analyze: 
a.  Compiled material provided by the City 
(anticipated to include an inventory of existing 
character; relevant area plans & studies in the 
past five years, usability/connectivity 
assessments/audits, among others.) 
b.    Completed background studies expected 
to be completed by other contractors by 
September 2016, including Construction cost 
report, Gentrification report, and 
Infrastructure needs report. Use these and 
other constraints to temper scenarios to be 
developed for stakeholder consideration and 
eventual recommendations. 
c.   Identify any additional information that 
consultants feel is pertinent to the project. 
Demonstrate why this information is 
necessary. 
 
2.3 Unchanged, but moved to 4.3 
2.4  Unchanged, but moved to 0.6 
2.5 Unchanged, but moved to 0.7 
 
2.3 Identify station areas for in-depth study 
and analysis.     
a. Identify how many, which specific station 
areas will receive in depth attention, and why.  
b.    Describe how corridor-wide 
recommendations will address all station areas 
and/or station types throughout the corridor 
(e.g. downtown, urban neighborhood and 


 
D-8 
advocates. 
  
2.5 Infrastructure Needs Report (Final 
Deliverable): Analyze and identify 
infrastructure needed to support the Central 
Ave. BRT project, enhance pedestrian and 
bicycle access to and within  the corridor,and 
support TOD (utilities capacity, etc.). 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
town center used in CNT report, or other such 
classification). 
 
2.4   Develop and document concept [Final 
Deliverable] for station areas of focus, and 
other station areas by type, developed with 
and supported by sufficient number and or 
types of public engagement participants. 
Concept shall include strategies to achieve 
station area goals and desired outcomes, 
feasible pathways to implementation, and 
identification of constraints and barriers to 
success.  Develop format for conveying the 
resulting vision to stakeholders and others 
over time.  Station plan area concept shall 
include, but not be limited to the following: 
a. “last mile” multi-modal connections,  
b. Proposing mixed use and affordable 
housing sites and strategies,  
c. Determining circulation and parking 
(including shared parking 
opportunities, and the location and 
timing of needed parking structures.  
2.5 Develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
[Final Deliverable] to include how the effort 
will be organized, any phases, strategies for 
stakeholder identification, and the anticipated 
number and types of events for in-depth 
engagement with multiple feedback loops. 
a. Develop and review scenarios that build 
toward stakeholder consensus focusing on 
feasible strategies that have the most 
potential to contribute to the development 
ROI goals given market and other 
conditions. Design a communications strategy 
and capacities needed to ensure broad 
awareness of, and inclusion in, the outreach 
and consensus efforts.  
 


 
D-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.6 Meet with relevant agencies and 
stakeholders to vet ideas early in their 
development and coordinate with ongoing 
initiative, ensure seamless implementation and 
identify possibilities and priorities. 
  
2.7 Recommend priority actions and projects 
from each of the reports for the Comp Plan 
implementation section. 
2.6     Generate a Station Areas Strategies 
Report [Final Deliverable] with 
recommendations supported by the public 
engagement process (and measures to track 
their progress over time) to realistically 
achieve the desired $2b/$1b goals including: 
a.  any needed changes to draft regulatory 
documents (ABC->Z) 
b.  design considerations 
c.  identification of key opportunities 
d.  the removal of barriers (including public 
policies and private practices, as applicable) 
e.  anticipated utility needs 
f.  the creation of incentives toward highest 
yield development 
g.  potential private sector and other 
partnerships 
h.  prioritized public sector project pipelines 
for various investments and needed financing 
and funding mechanisms. 
i.  Equity & economic inclusion considerations 
2.7 Meet with relevant agencies and 
stakeholders to vet ideas early in their 
development and coordinate with ongoing 
initiative, ensure seamless implementation 
and identify possibilities and priorities. 
 
2.8 Recommend priority actions and projects 
from each of the reports and 2.6 for the Comp 
Plan Implementation section. 
 
TASK 3.0 COMP PLAN UPDATES (July 2015-Mar 
2016) 
  
3.1 Develop goals, policies, and 
implementation strategies pertaining to 
regional and corridor multimodal connectivity, 
performance measures (such as?), and land 
use/transportation coordination to encourage 
TOD. Develop policy maps for land use and 
TASK 3.0 Comp Plan Updates  (Sept - Dec 
2016) 
 
3.1 Review compiled recommendations on 
goals, policies, and implementation strategies 
pertaining to regional and corridor multimodal 
connectivity, performance measures, and land 
use/transportation coordination to encourage 
TOD. Develop policy maps for land use and 


 
D-10 
transportation hierarchy of modes within a 
regional network. 
  
3.2 Hold public workshops  to gather input  on 
maps, goals/policies, implementation 
priorities, and timeframes. (Milestone- 
September 2015) 
  
3.3 Develop the final draft of Comp Plan 
Updates (Final Deliverable) for adoption. 
transportation hierarchy of modes within a 
regional network. 
 
3.2 Use collected information from tasks above 
to compile a report with recommended 
additions/modifications to Comp Plan in close 
coordination with ABC—>Z process  [Final 
deliverable & Milestone] 
  
     
TASK 4.0 UDO (October 2015-Decr 2016) 
  
4.1 Model and perform economic analyses of 
future land use and zoning changes in the 
corridor against the baseline and performance 
measures. Create onIine zone comparison tools 
for public review of proposed changes. 
4.2 Conduct public meetings in a variety of 
formats with relevant stakeholder groups and 
the general public to share initial assessments 
and generate feedback on strategic directions 
for land use and transportation changes. 
  
4.3 Develop drafts of new and revised zones 
and transportation standards with input from  
relevant stakeholders, key staff from other 
planning efforts, and relevant agencies. 
  
4.4 Develop final UDO draft (Final Deliverable) 
based on public  input and agency review. 
  
4.5 Submit the final UDO draft for adoption 
(Milestone- October 2016). 
  
TASK 4  IDO (Nov 2016 –May 2017) 
 
4.1 Model and perform economic analyses of 
future land use scenarios and zoning changes 
against baseline and performance measures 
toward $2 billion in corridor real estate 
reinvestment. 
4.2 Use collected information from tasks above 
to compile a report with recommended 
additions/modifications to Comp Plan in close 
coordination with ABC->Z process  [Final 
deliverable & Milestone]  
  
4.3. Financial Strategies Report (final 
deliverable): Analyze and identify areas in the 
corridor with high potential for value capture, 
development incentives, and other innovative 
financial tools based on tasks 1.2 and 2.1. 
  
TASK 5 Household Expenditure Reduction 
(Mar-Dec 2017) 
 
5.1 Conduct transit connectivity & ridership 
analyses, including from user’s perspective, 
and identify a project pipeline and partners for 


 
D-11 
“last mile” connections and measures for 
increased ridership and shared benefits. 
 
5.2 Coordinate affordable housing strategies in 
the corridor to leverage place-based 
efficiencies. Identify and align multiple funding 
streams into a project pipeline. 
 
5.3. Explore with utilities and community 
partners, the potential value of combined 
utility efficiency upgrades/retrofits in station 
area residential units. If proven feasible, 
outline a program design, highlighting spatial 
and place-based elements and provide to 
external partners for further development and 
deployment. 
 
5.4. Conduct a financial capacity source and 
flow analysis with development stakeholders 
(financial institutions, community 
development funders and actors, development 
professionals, etc.) to identify the barriers to 
prioritized, predictable, systematic residential 
and commercial TOD investment potential 
uses of value capture, and possible public -
private partnerships. 
   
   
Identify specific goals in the metropolitan transportation plan and existing local plans in the 
transit project corridor that the proposed planning work supports: 
MTP 2040: http://www.mrcog-nm.gov/transportation/metro-planning/long-range-
mtp?showall=&start=1.Enhance the livability, safety, and environmental conditions of the region 
through ... sustainable transportation decisions. Develop a transportation system that promotes 
economic activity and vitality in the region,... [and] provide[s] an affordable, efficient, multi-modal and 
safe transportation network.  Also, we will give particular attention to alternative land use scenarios in 
the corridor and assess their impact on regional performance.  
 
CITY’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: http://abc-zone.com/ Expand and strengthen concentrations of 
moderate and high-density mixed land use and social/economic activities that reduce urban sprawl, 
auto travel needs, and service costs, and enhance the identity of Albuquerque and its communities. 
Develop corridors (both streets and adjacent land uses) that provide a balanced circulation system 


 
D-12 
through efficient placement of employment and services, and encouragement of bicycling, walking, 
and use of transit/paratransit as alternatives to automobile travel. 
 
AREA PLAN: West Side Strategic Plan  
LOCAL PLANS: East Gateway, Downtown 2025, Downtown Neighborhood Area ) Historic Central , 
Municipal Redevelopment Plans 
Is the applicant the sponsor of the transit project?  √ Yes       No                                                                 
Is the applicant responsible for land use planning in at least a portion of the transit project corridor?                                  
√  Yes       No 
  
If you answered 'no'  to one of the last two questions, attach to your SF424 application  evidence of a partnership (such as 
a memorandum of  agreement  or letter  of intent  that  describes the  parties'  roles and  responsibilities)between the 
transit project sponsor and at least one entity in the project corridor with land use planning authority. 
 
 
 
Project Budget 
Pilot Program for TOD Planning 
 
 
 
 
MAJOR TASK 
 
REQUEST 
OTHER 
FED 
 LOCAL 
MATCH 
TOTAL COST 
BY TASK 
TASK 0.0 Stakeholder Cultivation, 
Strengthening of Civic 
Infrastructure, Preparatory Studies 
Jun-Sep 
$230,000 
 $             
 
 
$81,667 
$311,667 
TASK 1.0 Partner Organization and 
Planning Firm Consultations 
Jul –Jan 
$40,000 
 $             
 
  
$16,667 
$56,667 
TASK 2.0  Corridor Visioning, 
Station Area Engagement, Planning 
and Priority Consensus Building 
Aug-Mar 
$453,100 
 $             
 
 
 $25,000 
$478,100 
TASK 3.0 Comp Plan 
Sep-Dec 
$21,000 
 $             
 
 
$16,667 
$37,667 
TASK 4.0 IDO 
Nov-May 
$34,000 
 $             
 
 
$16,667 
$50,667 
TASK 5.0 Household Expenditure 
Reduction 
Mar-Dec 
$81,900 
 $             
 
 
$58,332 
$140,232 
Totals 
 
$860,000 
 $             $215,000 
$1,075,000 


 
D-13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Congressional Districts Affected by the Project 
Congressional District: NM-001      Congressional Representative: Michelle Lujan Grisham 
Section Ill. Evaluation Criteria 
Demonstrated Need 
  
What are the barriers to transit-oriented 
development in the corridor and how wiII the 
proposed work overcome them? 
 
Our 1975 Zoning Code reflects the auto-
oriented, single-purpose approach to land use 
and transportation reflective of its time.  
While the City has adopted sector 
development plans and overlay districts within 
the corridor as band-aids to encourage and/or 
mandate transit-oriented and transit-
supportive development, the resulting tangle 
of conflicting and competing goals, policies, 
and regulations has created barriers to the 
few forward-thinking developers willing to risk 
transit-oriented development, despite very 
little market pressure. The City's economy is 
heavily dependent on federal spending (i.e., 
Sandia National Labs, Kirtland Air Force Base, 
etc.),and declining federal budgets coupled 
with job loss associated with sequestration 
and the government shutdown in October 
2012 have had a significant negative effect on 
our development market, beyond the general 
stagnation following the 2008 recession. In 
addition to being a sprawling, auto-oriented 
western city, Albuquerque also faces an 
impending congestion crisis caused by a 
regional imbalance of bedroom communities 
west of the Rio Grande and over 90% of the 
region's employment east of the river. Central 
What are the barriers to transit-oriented 
development in the corridor and how wiII the 
proposed work overcome them? 
 
Our 1975 Zoning Code reflects the auto-
oriented, single-purpose approach to land use 
and transportation reflective of its time.  While 
the City has adopted sector development plans 
and overlay districts within the corridor as 
band-aids to encourage and/or mandate 
transit-oriented and transit-supportive 
development, the resulting tangle of conflicting 
and competing goals, policies, and regulations 
has created barriers to the few forward-
thinking developers willing to risk transit-
oriented development, despite very little 
market pressure. The City's economy is heavily 
dependent on federal spending (i.e., Sandia 
National Labs, Kirtland Air Force Base, etc.),and 
declining federal budgets coupled with job loss 
associated with sequestration and the 
government shutdown in October 2012 have 
had a significant negative effect on our 
development market, beyond the general 
stagnation following the 2008 recession. In 
addition to being a sprawling, auto-oriented 
western city, Albuquerque also faces an 
impending congestion crisis caused by a 
regional imbalance of bedroom communities 
west of the Rio Grande and over 90% of the 
region's employment east of the river. Central 


 
D-14 
Ave. has the largest transit mode share of any 
city street. In order to leverage this success 
and support the BRT project, the City will 
replace its zoning code, update transportation 
standards, and consolidate all standalone 
plans into a Unified Development Ordinance, 
incentivizing TOD and streamlining approvals. 
  
Ave. has the largest transit mode share of any 
city street. In order to leverage this success and 
support the BRT project, the City will replace its 
zoning code, update transportation standards, 
and consolidate all standalone plans into an 
Integrated Development Ordinance, 
incentivizing TOD and streamlining approvals. 
Further, a recent county-wide property value 
analysis for the corridor revealed 72,000 
additional households at financial risk beyond 
what standard federal affordability data show, 
increasing the anticipated impact of the 
proposed corridor-wide affordable housing 
siting, density and funding flow alignment.  
Finally, the MPO (MRCOG)’s board of regional 
policy-makers committed to increasing transit 
mode share among the Priority Transit Network 
(of which Central is key) to 20 percent of all 
trips by 2040. There is funding attached, with 
25% of all future sub-allocated federal funds to 
be allocated to transit. http://www.mrcog-
nm.gov/images/stories/pdf/transportation/2040_MTP/
2040-mtp-appendix-k-revised-transit-mode-share-
goals.pdf.  
How will the proposed work advance 
transit-oriented development in the 
corridor and region? 
The proposed work would update the City's 
Comprehensive Plan to better coordinate 
land use and transportation and tie TOO­ 
supportive policies to economic 
development goals and implementation 
efforts.  This project would then create a 
UDO that implements multimodal streets 
through updated transportation standards, 
changes zoning along Central Ave and other 
key corridors to encourage TOO, and 
streamlines by-right approvals for transit-
supportive development. If selected for this 
grant, the City will be able to add a 
How will the proposed work advance 
transit-oriented development in the corridor 
and region? 
The proposed work would update the City's 
Comprehensive Plan to better coordinate 
land use and transportation and tie TOD­ 
supportive policies to economic development 
goals and implementation efforts. The ABC-
>Z effort already underway will create an IDO 
that implements multimodal streets through 
updated transportation standards, changes 
zoning along Central Ave and other key 
corridors to encourage TOD, and streamlines 
by-right approvals for transit-supportive 
development. Through this grant, the City will 
be able to add a gentrification study, a 


 
D-15 
gentrification study, a financial tools report 
to encourage TOD implementation, an 
analysis of how to improve access to 
essential services for disadvantaged 
populations, and a comprehensive overhaul 
of policies and regulations governing 
development along this key corridor. Finally, 
the proposed work would include 
coordination with our Metropolitan 
Planning Organization, which has led the 
region's first Scenario Planning effort, 
resulting in a Preferred Scenario that 
dovetails with the City's efforts toward 
compact development along multimodal 
corridors and within key activity centers. 
The Scenario Plan will be part of the region's 
Metropolitan Transportation Plan 
2040,which will prioritize funding for transit 
and other transportation projects to 
implement the Scenario Plan. These 
regional efforts, coupled with the City's BRT 
project for Central and the City's revamp of 
land use regulatory system, will unlock TOD 
development here and elsewhere in the city. 
financial tools report and a construction costs 
report to encourage TOD implementation, an 
analysis of how to improve access to 
essential services for disadvantaged 
populations, and a comprehensive overhaul 
of policies and regulations governing 
development along this key corridor. Finally, 
the proposed work would include 
coordination with our Metropolitan Planning 
Organization, which has led the region's first 
Scenario Planning effort, resulting in a 
Preferred Scenario that dovetails with the 
City's efforts toward compact development 
along multimodal corridors and within key 
activity centers. The Scenario Plan will be 
part of the region's Metropolitan 
Transportation Plan 2040, which will 
prioritize funding for transit and other 
transportation projects to implement the 
Scenario Plan. These regional efforts, coupled 
with the City's BRT project for Central and the 
City's revamp of land use regulatory system, 
will unlock TOD development here and 
elsewhere in the city. 
Why are Pilot Program for Transit-Oriented 
Development Planning funds needed to 
realize the expected outcomes of the 
planning work? 
  
While the City Council has allocated $1.5 
million for our citywide effort, the total 
expected cost of updating the 
Comprehensive Plan and a UDO is $3 
million, based on research of similar efforts 
in other cities. Central Avenue/ Rte. 66 
comprises the most complicated piece of 
the overall puzzle, traveling the full width 
of the City, intersecting multiple low-
income communities, layered with the 
most sector development plans and 
Why are Pilot Program for Transit-Oriented 
Development Planning funds needed to realize 
the expected outcomes of the planning work? 
  
While the City Council has allocated $1.5 million 
for our citywide ABC->Z effort, the total 
expected cost of updating the Comprehensive 
Plan and an IDO is $3 million, based on research 
of similar efforts in other cities. Central 
Avenue/Rte. 66 comprises the most 
complicated piece of the overall puzzle, 
traveling the full width of the City, intersecting 
multiple low-income communities, layered with 
the most sector development plans and overlay 
districts, and representing the greatest 
potential for TOD in the region. The City has the 


 
D-16 
overlay districts, and representing the 
greatest potential for TOD in the region.  
The City has the largest economy in the 
state, but the state itself is ranked 49th in 
poverty, and any significant development 
will have a threat of gentrification 
disproportionately larger than other cities. 
The current funding a !location does not 
cover the planning work itself, much less 
additional studies to assess the threat of 
gentrification and potential remedies or 
financial strategies to incentivize TOD in 
this important corridor. The Central BRT 
project will be considered only in general 
terms without additional funding; this 
grant would ensure a robust, 
comprehensive, and results-based 
approach to incorporate BRT in Comp Plan 
policies and implementation coordination, 
as well as zoning and transportation 
standards within the IDO. The 
gentrification study would provide an 
assessment of the dangers as well as 
effective mitigation measures to be 
implemented immediately and over time 
as the corridor develops. 
largest economy in the state, but the state itself 
is ranked 49th in poverty, and any significant 
development will have a threat of gentrification 
disproportionately larger than other cities. The 
current funding a !location does not cover the 
planning work itself, much less additional 
studies to assess the threat of gentrification 
and potential remedies or creative financial 
strategies to incentivize TOD in this important 
corridor. The Central BRT project will be 
considered only in general terms without 
additional funding. This grant would ensure a 
robust, comprehensive, and results-based 
approach to incorporate BRT in Comp Plan 
policies and implementation coordination, as 
well as zoning and transportation standards 
within the IDO. The gentrification study would 
provide an assessment of the dangers as well as 
effective mitigation measures to be 
implemented immediately and over time as the 
corridor develops. 
 
 
 Provide the approximate current population and employment of the area that the work plan will address: 
Population: 90,751 (36,776 households)  
Employment: 66,512 
 
Describe ongoing transit-oriented development activity in the area that the work plan will address 


 
D-17 
Proposed TOD Projects in Yellow, In Progress TOD Projects in Red above. Highlights include: 
 
De Anza (4301 Central NE): RFP awarded for redevelopment of this historic Rte. 66 motor lodge. 
  
The Carlisle (3600 Central SE): 3-story private development underway. 36 condos, ground-floor retail. 
 
El Vado (2424 Central SW): RFP awarded for mixed-use redevelops of an historic Rte.66 motor  lodge 
with  70 housing units,16,000 SF of commercial, including small business incubator. 
  
Country Club Plaza (Central/Laguna Blvd.):Private mixed-use. 25 housing  units, 6400 SF office, 3600 SF 
restaurant, 9500 SF other uses. 
  
517 Gold SW: Conversion of three-story commercial building to 216 residential units 
  
Imperial Building (205 Silver SW): Private mixed-use development w/ 74 housing units,11,500 SF 
grocery,12,000 SF retail & eateries 
  
Innovate ABQ, a 7-acre core of an Innovation District with over 300,000 project SF of tech office, and 
residential development focused on the leveraging the region’s national comparative advantage in 
scientific research toward new product and firm creation. 
 
Uptown Transit Center – issue an RFP by September 2016 for a potential 5-story mixed-use, possibly 
mixed income, associated development project (with FTA) at the northern terminus of the ART service 
along Louisiana Boulevard from Central Avenue. 
 
 


 
D-18 
Strength of the Work Plan, Schedule and Process 
 
If the proposed work plan does not cover the 
entire transit project corridor – why not? 
  
The proposed work plan covers the entire 
transit  project corridor, including areas where 
transit service will likely be extended in the 
future beyond the current service extents. The 
study area is defined as a half-mile width on 
either side of the transit corridor, which could 
reasonably be expected to draw passengers 
and be impacted by future TOD and transit 
investments.  Major and Community Activity 
Centers (defined in Comp Plan) intersected by 
the corridor are also included in the study 
area. 
If the proposed work plan does not cover the 
entire transit project corridor – why not? 
  
The proposed work plan covers the entire 
transit project corridor, including areas where 
transit service will likely be extended in the 
future beyond the current service extents. The 
study area is defined as a half-mile width on 
either side of the transit corridor, which could 
reasonably be expected to draw passengers 
and be impacted by future TOD and transit 
investments.  Major and Community Activity 
Centers (defined in Comp Plan) intersected by 
the corridor are also included in the study 
area. 
Identify performance measures for the 
proposed planning work: 
· Access to Transit (HH w/in  1/2-mi) 
· Access to Activity Centers (HH 1 m i or 1/4 mi 
transit stop) 
· Access to Bicycle Facilities (HH 1 mi or 1/4 mi 
transit) Jobs w/in  1/2 mi of transit stop 
·   Access to Jobs (HH w/in 1 mi) 
·   Jobs/Housing Mix in Activity Centers 
(Employment  HH in Activity Centers) Housing 
Density & Types (SF v. MF w/in 1/2 mi) 
·   New Land Developed/ Redeveloped (acres in 
1/2 mi) 
·   Vacant Land 
·   Vehicle Hours Traveled (Total driving  time 
for all roadway users during PM peak hour) 
VMT- Vehicle Miles Traveled (total and per 
capita) 
 
·  %  of Network in Congested Conditions (% of 
VMT with V/C > 1.0 during  PM peak hour) 
·  Transit Ridership % increase over base year 
·   Transit Passenger Miles Traveled 
Identify performance measures for the 
proposed planning work: 
· Access to Transit (HH w/in  1/2-mi) 
· Access to Activity Centers (HH 1 m i or 1/4 mi 
transit stop) 
· Access to Bicycle Facilities (HH 1 mi or 1/4 mi 
transit) Jobs w/in  1/2 mi of transit stop 
·   Access to Jobs (HH w/in 1 mi) 
·   Jobs/Housing Mix in Activity Centers 
(Employment  HH in Activity Centers) Housing 
Density & Types (SF v. MF w/in 1/2 mi) 
·   New Land Developed/ Redeveloped (acres in 
1/2 mi) 
·   Vacant Land 
·   Vehicle Hours Traveled (Total driving  time 
for all roadway users during PM peak hour) 
VMT- Vehicle Miles Traveled (total and per 
capita), and Vehicles/HH, VMT/HH/Year, 
transportation options 
·  %  of Network in Congested Conditions (% of 
VMT with V/C > 1.0 during  PM peak hour) 
·  Transit Ridership % increase over base year 
·   Transit Passenger Miles Traveled 


 
D-19 
·   Transit Mode Share 
·   Daily River Crossing Trips (by each mode) 
Average Commute Time (minutes & by mode) 
Crash Incidents (ped, bike,& vehicle) 
·   Access by Income, Disabled, & Age Groups 
(commute time; proximity to jobs, schools, 
grocery, healthcare, rec; transit frequency)  
·   Transit Mode Share 
·   Daily River Crossing Trips (by each mode) 
Average Commute Time (minutes & by mode) 
Crash Incidents (ped, bike,& vehicle) 
·   Access by Income, Disabled, & Age Groups 
(commute time; proximity to jobs, schools, 
grocery, healthcare, rec; transit frequency) 
·   Auto Ownership & Transportation Costs 
·   Because the IDO potentially regulates 
elements of urban form to enforce TOD 
outcomes, measures will also include block 
size, intersection density (connectivity), block 
perimeter maximums, building orientation, mix 
of uses, and expanded housing types and sizes. 
    To measure progress toward the $2 billion 
real estate ROI, we will measure the value of 
property improvements through permits, and 
property value over time.  For the $1 billion in 
savings to households we will use existing 
measures of ridership and transit pass 
distribution and use (frequently at the census 
block group level), and will seek to develop 
further measures that can tie these to 
particular addresses and income levels, to 
identify the benefits to low income persons.  
How will you address possible gentrification 
and displacement as part of the work plan? 
  
-Units of analysis for performance measures- 
by income group /locations to be addressed 
with bus stop adjustments, etc. 
-Substantial neighborhood involvement, focus 
groups for affordable housing providers along 
corridor, and outreach to advocacy 
organizations, non-profits, and  stakeholders 
-Comp Plan update to housing policies, goals, 
and projects, including coordination with land 
use, transportation, and economic 
development goals and policies, as well as 
implementation tools and priorities 
How will you address possible gentrification 
and displacement as part of the work plan? 
  
-Units of analysis for performance measures- 
by income group /locations to be addressed 
with bus stop adjustments, etc. 
-Substantial neighborhood involvement, focus 
groups for affordable housing providers along 
corridor, and outreach to advocacy 
organizations, non-profits, and  stakeholders 
-Comp Plan update to housing policies, goals, 
and projects, including coordination with land 
use, transportation, and economic 
development goals and policies, as well as 
implementation tools and priorities 


 
D-20 
-Coordination with the New Mexico Mortgage 
Finance Authority, City Family & Community 
Services Department, City Senior Affairs 
Department, and the independent Housing 
Authority 
-Incentives for affordable housing as part of a 
density bonus along corridor 
-More development by-right  along the 
corridor (increases areas viable for affordable 
housing  projects) 
-Potential for regulations, incentives, and 
partnerships for incubator spaces for local 
entrepreneurs in new developments (i.e. save 
spaces for local small business startups so that 
residents can increase their incomes and afford 
to remain living nearby.) 
-Coordination with the New Mexico Mortgage 
Finance Authority, City Family & Community 
Services Department, City Senior Affairs 
Department, and the independent Housing 
Authority 
-Incentives for affordable housing as part of a 
density bonus along corridor 
-More development by-right along the corridor 
(increases areas viable for affordable housing  
projects) 
-Potential for regulations, incentives, and 
partnerships for incubator spaces for local 
entrepreneurs in new developments or shared 
workspace (i.e. save spaces for local small 
business startups so that residents can 
increase their incomes and afford to remain 
living nearby.) 
How does the work plan demonstrate a 
commitment to connecting disadvantaged  
populations to essential services? 
  
Many disadvantaged families are either single-
car households or zero-car households.  
lncreasing the viability of TOD along the 
corridor, coupled with savvy affordable 
housing planning, will help provide access to 
jobs, services, healthcare, and recreation along 
the corridor and throughout the city via more 
viable alternative  transportation. As Central is 
already the best-used transit corridor in the 
City and houses the Alvarado Transit Station, 
which connects every bus line in town. 
Development along the transit corridor  helps 
support and enhance BRT service and 
reinforces the overall transit system, which in 
turn determines how much of the City can be 
accessed via transit, biking, and walking. The 
Central Ave corridor is already a key connector  
of low-income communities to the biggest 
regional hospital­ Presbyterian at Central and 
How does the work plan demonstrate a 
commitment to connecting disadvantaged 
populations to essential services? 
  
Many disadvantaged families are either single-
car households or zero-car households. 
lncreasing the viability of TOD along the 
corridor, coupled with savvy affordable 
housing planning, will help provide access to 
jobs, services, healthcare, and recreation along 
the corridor and throughout the city via more 
viable alternative  transportation. Central is 
already the best-used transit corridor in the 
City and houses the Alvarado Transit Station, 
which connects every bus line in town. 
Development along the transit corridor  helps 
support and enhance BRT service and 
reinforces the overall transit system, which in 
turn determines how much of the City can be 
accessed via transit, biking, and walking. The 
Central Ave corridor is already a key connector  
of low-income communities to the biggest 
regional hospital­ Presbyterian at Central and 


 
D-21 
Sycamore- and smaller community clinics to 
the east near San Mateo and to the west at 
Unser Blvd,as well as government and social 
services downtown. 
Sycamore- and smaller community clinics to 
the east near San Mateo and to the west at 
Unser Blvd, as well as government and social 
services downtown. 
 
 
Will the proposed planning work leverage other discretionary Federal planning grants that have already 
been awarded?  
 
 
√ Yes      No     If so, please describe how: 
The City has a grant directly related to the Analysis, Study, and Implementation of a BRT (FTA grant 
number  NM 03 0025). Now that the City has committed to the Central Avenue BRT project, work 
performed  as part of the Pilot TOD Planning Grant can help to leverage the initial grant to explore 
and implement a successful transit project in coordination with transit-supportive and transit-
oriented development and larger multimodal network, especially infrastructure needs for bike/ped 
accessibility. 
 
The City also has a grant for the Uptown Transit Center (Federal grant number Grant NM-03-0021). 
Since the BRT route includes service to this Uptown Transit Center, the envisioned mixed use 
joint/ancillary development at the Uptown site will be augmented by this proposed TOD planning 
grant’s focus on improving the pedestrian environment and connections to the region’s premier office 
and shopping center, ABQ Uptown. 
 
 


 
D-22 
 Likelihood of Transit Project Implementation 
 
Is the transit project currently in the Project Development or Engineering phase of the Capital 
Investment Grant Program (CIGP) process?               √ Yes     
No 
  
If not,indicate the expected project mode, the project  length and number  of stations, the date that 
NEPA was initiated for the project and the anticipated date of entry into Project Development: 
  
Is the transit project currently listed in the region's metropolitan transportation plan? 
√Yes       
No 
  
If so, provide the URL of the plan document and indicate wherein the plan (project ID or page number)  
the project  appears: 
  
The project is included in the most recent Unified Planning Work Program for Federal Fiscal Years 2015 
& 2016, listed as project 5.6, page 34.  
http://www.mrcog-nm.gov/transportation/unified-planning-work-program 
This same project number and description are also listed in the draft 2017 & 2018 UPWP, to be 
approved by the MPO board in July.  ABQ Ride has been submitting quarterly reports to the MPO since 
inclusion in the UPWP. 
  
 
Funding Commitments 
 
Identify the sources of all matching funds. For 
each source, indicate whether the funds are 
already committed. Attach documentation 
of all funding commitments to your SF424 app: 
City of Albuquerque- $1.5 million committed 
for Comp Plan Update+ Unified Development 
Ordinance- citywide. TOD planning for Central 
is assumed to make up 35% of the workload. 
The gentrification report, financial tools report, 
and infrastructure report to improve 
pedestrian and bicycle access to and within the 
corridor are assumed to be specific to the TOD 
project and budgeted at 1OO % of their total 
projected cost ($550,000).The total City match 
is more than covered with the committed 
funds. 
Identify the sources of all matching funds. For 
each source, indicate whether the funds are 
already committed. Attach documentation 
of all funding commitments to your SF424 app: 
City of Albuquerque - $215,000 earmarked 
(submitted to, but pending final City Council 
approval NLT June 20) and to be committed as 
the required 20% local match. As described in 
the original proposal, the city also committed 
$1.5 million for the Comp Plan Update and IDO 
(for which the Central Corridor represents 
35%of its workload), but due to the timing of 
the award notification, these significant 
planning funds no longer are eligible as match. 
Further, beyond this grant’s current match 
pledge, in FY 2106 Central Avenue corridor 


 
D-23 
  
planning funds have been expended prior to 
the grant award notice, including $40,000 for 
four Transit and Development workshops 
engaging over 200 residents, business and 
community leaders, and $65,000 for the CNT 
study that identified the $2 and $1 billion real 
estate and community ROI. Over $150,000 was 
spent on place-based CBO development 
partners and a market analyses for prospective 
development. Though the grant timing allowed 
none of these expenditures to serve as a 
match, they do demonstrate a substantial 
commitment to TOD and all advance the state 
of the effort involved in the workplace toward 
our ultimate goals. In the FY 2017 budget, the 
Economic Development Department also has 
$175,000 earmarked for small business 
outreach, TA and business planning. 
 


 
` 
 
City of Albuquerque 
 
Addendum #1 
 
 
Solicitation Number:  P2017000001 
 
ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deadline for Receipt of Offers:  September 06, 2016 at 4:00 p.m. (Mountain Time) 
The City eProcurement System will not allow proposals to be submitted after this date and time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
City of Albuquerque 
Department of Finance and Administrative Services 
Purchasing Division 
 


P2017000001, ABQ Central Corridor TOD Planning  
 
 
The purpose of this addendum is to respond to all potential respondents’ questions. 
 
1. Does the page count refer to physical pages, or is a one double-sided page considered two 
pages? 
• 
One double-sided physical page is considered two pages 
 
2. Do you have a preference for double-sided versus single-sided submissions? 
• 
No. 
 
3.      Could you please specify exactly which sections are included in the page maximum 
count? Is the “Part 3: Scope of Services” part of this, or is it a separate section similar to 
the Cost Proposal section?  
• 
All portions of the Technical Proposal, with the exception of the Cover Page, 
 
Table of Contents, Project Timeline and Work Product sample(s) included as an 
 
appendix, are included in the page maximum count. 
 
4.    Do the 3 professional reference letters requested in section 2.1.3 count toward the 20 
 
page limit? 
• 
Yes. 
 
5.  Do staff resumes count toward the 20 page limit? 
• 
Yes. 
 
6.  Section 2.1.2.1 asks for staff resumes demonstrating relevant qualifications. Section 2.1.4 
 
requests staff summary biographies and relevant professional experience. Can all of this 
 
information be included in the staff resumes in 2.1.2.1? 
• 
Offerors may present this information in any manner they see fit.  
 
 
 
 
PLEASE REMEMBER THE TIME AND DATE OF CLOSING SHALL BE STRICTLY 
OBSERVED.  
 
Please incorporate the change in this Addendum in the original RFP document. Sign and return 
this Addendum with your RFP response. Failure to acknowledge addendum may result in your 
offer being deemed non-responsive. 
 
**************************************************************************  
Acknowledged & Returned:  
 
 
____________________________________  
Signature 
_____________________________  
Printed Name Title Company 
