214 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
The Civil Rights Act and the Executive Or­
der on Environmental Justice require City 
practices and policies to not have adverse 
effects on the basis of race, sex, and income. 
This plan demonstrates readiness to be a 
leadership city in the practice of social eq­
uity and inclusion. Several current initiatives 
can give voice and choice to communities 
along the bus rapid transit corridor.
New federal rules require that all Commu­
nity Development Block Grant recipients 
modify their five-year consolidated plans to 
include affirmative actions to increase local 
housing affordability and reduce segrega­
tion. The Affirmatively Further Fair Hous­
ing Screening Tool reports on three key 
indicators of transit accessibility, transporta­
tion affordability and employment acces­
sibility, with the City required to publicly 
disclose its progress to reduce the trans­
portation cost burden on low to moderate 
income households and people of color.
USDOT will be adopting first-time perfor­
mance measures to be used by NMDOT, 
MRCOG, and ABQ Ride. 
The restructuring of Fannie Mae and Fred­
die Mac will likely require those institu­
tions increase credit access to underserved 
markets. For Albuquerque, performance 
measures can help make certain downtown 
development tracts eligible to receive tax 
credit assistance from the New Mexico 
MFA. 
In addition to these shifts on the federal 
level, a number of local initiatives are un­
derway to bolster social equity. In October 
2016, Albuquerque became part of the 
Bloomberg Philanthropies’ What Works 
Cities initiative, in part to enhance race 
equity and quality of life. This action plan 
identifies a set of emerging opportunities 
to improve capital access both directly to 
the poor and to projects along the Central 
Avenue Corridor. By providing information 
to employers about how they can provide 
employees pre-paid transit services and ad­
ditional first-and-last-mile supplemental ser­
vice, the likelihood of serving lower-income 
workers more equitably increases. Shared 
mobility alternatives and a transportation 
equity strategy can help to meet the needs of 
the working poor. As strategies such as the 
Innovation District take hold and as transit 
service improves with the current Central 
Avenue Corridor and the planned north-
south University Avenue alignment, oppor­
tunities will emerge for business, institu­
tional and governmental location decisions 
that are more location efficient and transit 
accessible. A jobs-to-people strategy for such 
location decisions can complement the more 
traditional people-to-jobs strategy. g
BUILDING COMMUNITY AND BROADENING THE DIALOGUE
EQUITY AND
INCLUSION


215
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
 B.01
New transit service often results 
in gentrification and evidence 
shows this is occurring around sta­
tion areas along Central Avenue. 
When the demand for housing in a neigh­
borhood exceeds supply, the result is usually 
an increase in the average income. The 
formal name for this situation is gentrifica­
tion. The average income of a neighborhood 
can increase even if no one leaves, from new 
higher income residents. 
Gentrification need not result in displace­
ment, but renters are twice as likely to 
be displaced. 58% of households located 
within ½ mile of an ART stop are renters. 
Risk can be mitigated through affordable 
housing covenants and can also be addressed 
by requiring developers to pay a linked 
development fee, exaction, or opt-out fee 
into a fund. Albuquerque currently has no 
such mandated requirements for inclusion­
ary housing and no mechanism for linked 
development. 
Albuquerque has a gap in housing afford­
ability. Nearly 37% of households pay 30% 
or more of their income for housing. Hous­
ing costs in Albuquerque range from 9 to 
92% of household income. 
 T.01 
1.	
Create complete communities that 
work for everyone. Adopt a Develop­
ment without Displacement policy 
for dwellings along Central Avenue. 
Create inclusionary housing require­
ments, tying bonuses and approvals 
for increased density and mixed-use 
character to affirmative affordability. 
Locate housing that meets 30% housing 
affordability within walking distance of a 
transit stop. Inclusionary housing require­
Toolkit Key
BARRIER
TOOL
EQUITY AND 
INCLUSION
FINANCE


216 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
Income and poverty levels, from The Central Corridor Neighborhood Study by UNM.
ment: all buildings developed within 5/8 of 
a mile of Central Avenue having more than 
10 dwelling units of housing will include 
at least 20% of total units rented to meet 
the affordability needs of Very Low, Low, or 
Moderate Income households, as defined by 
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development. 
Affordability will be defined as rents being 
less than 30% of area median household 
income for the purposes of qualifying for 
direct rent subsidies and project subsidies 
such as Section 8/Housing Choice Vouch­
ers or Low Income Housing Tax Credits. A 
model ordinance is provided by Washington 
University Law School at http://landuselaw.
wustl.edu/sample_ordinance.pdf. 
2.	
Prevent commercial gentrification to 
maintain essential neighborhood ser­
vices and cultural cornerstones through 
programs to protect long-term com­
mercial tenants. 
Work with national retailers to offer 
Central Avenue as a test-bed for emerging 
smaller-store formats. All major food retail­
ers in the U.S. and those abroad choosing 
to expand U.S. operations are now experi­
menting with smaller store formats that 
could conceivably fit into Central Avenue 
urban character. A similar movement toward 
smaller formats is being experimented with 
by department stores, and even by Hilton 
Hotels. This complements the movement in 
office space toward shared workspaces and 
shared-use mobility (such as car sharing and 
bicycle sharing) all of which results in more 
intensive use of available land. 
Create a regular design workshop that 
involves local urban designers, national 
retailers, commercial space developers, and 
shared use mobility vendors to raise the pro­
file of Albuquerque and Central Avenue and 
secure voluntary commitments to mixed 
use formats. Since the amount of city tax 
yield from Gross Receipts Tax far outweighs 
that from Property Tax in New Mexico, this 
is consistent with and helps support other 
policies intended to intensity the public 
return on investment from Central Avenue. 
Explore means of encouraging local 
ownership in small stores. National retailers 
offer this through franchising, and through 
cooperative ownership—for example, all 
Ace, Tru-Value and Do It Best hardware 
stores are cooperatively owned, and there are 
similar opportunities for groceries, pharma­
cies and hotels.
3.	
Promote location efficiency for 
key destinations to reduce the travel 
required to access jobs, school, and 
childcare. 
Open a channel of communications 
with the State’s Mortgage Finance Author­
ity (MFA) and Community Development 
Financial Institutions around emerging op­
portunities. New Mexico receives an annual 
apportionments of Low Income Housing 
Tax Credits which are used to meet the 
equity finance requirements for affordable 
housing. The Qualifying Assistance Plan 
prepared annually by the MFA awards the 
credits competitively.  The MFA takes the 
combined cost of housing plus transporta­
tion into account so any projects intended 
to meet the affordable housing gap in Cen­
tral Avenue station areas are attractive for 
affordable housing developers and MFA. 
While affordable housing strategies are criti­
cal, such programs will not be able to help 
all of the households at risk of displacement 
in the corridor, and effort must be given to 
preserving and creating “naturally occur­
ring” affordable housing. This can include 
smaller units, accessory dwelling units, as 
well as efficiencies in energy, water, and 
childcare. 
	
       West Central	
             Old Town	
       Downtown                            University	   	
         Nob Hill	
        	


% Persons Below Poverty Level
Median Family Income
217
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
 B.02
Workforce housing needs addi­
tional funding sources.  
Albuquerque’s Workforce Housing Plan 
sets goals to support, preserve, produce, and 
protect affordable housing as well as protect 
the most vulnerable populations including el­
derly, at-risk youth, persons with disabilities, 
homeless and immigrants. The plan promotes 
home ownership for those excluded from the 
market with housing that is sustainable and 
affordable. However, the funds to implement 
the plan are often outpaced by needs.
 
 T.02 
1.	
Develop a focused strategy to grow 
the existing Workforce Housing 
Development Fund crafted with the 
participation of major employers and 
New Mexico’s existing community 
development financial institutions. 
Albuquerque’s Workforce Housing Trust 
Fund provides gap financing to fund afford­
able housing. Development projects that are 
eligible for fund assistance must set aside 
at least 30% of units to serve low-income 
households. The program added 402 afford­
able multifamily housing units to the city's 
inventory between 2008 and 2011. 
Bonds issued by the City of Albuquerque 
and approved by voters funds the trust. As 
of 2015, the Workforce Housing Trust Fund 
has received $32.5 million across four bond 
cycles, with a 2017 balance of $4 million. 
The Workforce Housing Trust Fund plan 
serves as chapter 5 in the Consolidated 
Plan which Albuquerque prepares every five 
years for the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development. The next filing of 
that plan for 2018-2022 will be submitted 
October 6, 2017 and must comply with 
new rules known as Affirmatively Furthering 
Fair Housing. 
The plan update requires using indicators 
showing progress in reducing the cost of 
transportation to households, increasing the 
accessibility of transit to households, and 
increasing employment accessibility due to 
transit. 
Lead by example in Albuquerque's plan 
for fair housing and use this submission to 
help assure that the community benefits of 
TOD work for everyone. The city is current­
ly working with major anchor institutions, 
including colleges and universities, medi­
cal centers and the Health Sciences Center 
around community economic development 
and equitable health goals, and should 
ensure that these activities are highlighted 
in the submission and in any accountable 
commitments made by Albuquerque toward 
meeting the goals of the Fair Housing Act.
  International District	
	
      East Gateway


Central Avenue
District Boundaries
218 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
Major employers, major activity cen­
ters, services, cultural centers, and APS 
schools, mapped by the University of 
New Mexico Central Corridor Neigh­
borhood Study.
 B.03
Albuquerque has a gap in trans­
portation affordability. 71% of 
households pay 45% or more of 
their income for a combination of 
housing and transportation. 
The typical housing and transportation costs 
run 51% of household median income, with 
a range of 29 to 120%.  
 T.03 
1.	
Use location efficiency as a screen for 
siting affordable housing.
A significant part of the $1 billion projected 
savings in household transportation outlays 
due to the new Premium Transit Corridors 
over the first 10 years of use come from 
both improved journey to work choices 
and less expensive non-work trip making 
(shopping, schools, services, recreation, 
friends, worship). Some of the savings will 
come from improved land use, minimizing 
the need to travel by car. Some will come 
from an increase in the number of people 
making use of ABQ Ride once the ART 
and University Avenue services are initiated. 
Some will come from newer types of travel 
choices such as bike and car sharing. Ensur­
ing that a location efficiency screen is used 
for siting housing intended to be affordable 
is essential to realizing these estimated sav­
ings, which have a more direct impact on 
social equity than the estimated increase in 
taxable value, although that value makes it 
possible to further invest in actions that can 
continue to reduce the cost of living, such as 
more transit improvements, the Transporta­
tion Management Association strategy, and 
a transit pass subsidy.
Propose a City Council resolution 
mandating that no city funds for affordable 
housing can be spent in areas of the city 
with high transportation costs. The City of 
El Paso is a precedent for this action. 
2.	
Link people with jobs. Create a 
Transportation Management As­
sociation (TMA) in partnership with 
employers to eliminate “first and last 
mile gaps” and “transit deserts.” Use 
this to offer new services and increase 
service frequency of current ABQ Ride, 
Rio Metro and NMDOT Park-and-
Ride Network along Premium Transit 
Corridors and intersecting routes
The Ash Center at the Harvard Kennedy 
School is currently developing a new cur­
riculum for city executives aimed at building 
capacity for effective mobility management, 
and will be looking for cities interested in 
building permanent capacity to close first 
and last mile gaps in public transportation. 
At the same time, Uber has signaled its 
willingness to experiment with meeting such 
gaps in partnership with major employ­
ers and transit providers, and MRCOG is 
actively seeking ways of meeting these gaps 
to boost ridership at Rail Runner stations. 
Some form of special purpose organization 
to meet first and last mile commuting gaps 
in public transportation systems exists in 
some 200 cities, but none are in New Mex­
ico. These partnerships not only cost-share 
among traditional governmental sources, 
but are able to secure voluntary contribu­
tions from major employers to further lower 
the cost of providing supplemental service 
through additional bus frequency, vanpools, 
or through shared use mobility. By con­
tracting for supplemental services, whether 
through established vanpool providers such 
as vRide or in partnership with ride-sourc­
	
	
	
	
	
West Central	
	
	
 Old Town	


219
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
ing firms such as Uber and Lyft, fixed costs 
can be eliminated and services expanded 
more quickly. 
The City and ABQ Ride should convene a 
meeting of knowledgeable experts, providers 
of TMA services, and the human resources 
directors of the largest employers in Albu­
querque to move this concept to reality. 
3.	
Build a partnership of major employ­
ers and anchor institutions to adopt 
and offer employer assisted transporta­
tion. 
The increased frequency and level of transit 
service that ART will provide will help 
working families more reliably commute to 
work. This will support employers, who are 
concerned about employee access, employee 
attraction, and employee retention. Employ­
ers offer transportation assistance in the 
form of making parking available, but the 
federal tax code allows employers offering 
subsidized transit passes to treat these as pre-
tax benefits from an employee point of view, 
thus offering transit assistance on the same 
basis as is offered for health care benefits. 
This Qualified Transit Fringe Benefit in 
Section 132 of the Internal Revenue Code 
allows the tax exclusion for transit and com­
muter highway vehicles of $255 per employ­
ee per month. Commuters can receive both 
the transit and parking benefits up to $510 
per month. Employers can allow employees 
to use pretax dollars to pay for transit passes, 
van pool fares, and parking. 
Convene human resources directors of 
major employers, major activity centers, 
services, cultural centers, and APS schools 
to help them make the decision to offer the 
Qualified Transit Fringe Benefit, resulting 
in patronage benefits for ABQ Ride, cost of 
living benefits for workers, and a consider­
able set of employer benefits. 
4.	
Increase the availability of shared 
cars, shared bicycles, and other ride-
share programs along Albuquerque's 
Premium Transit Corridors.
Car-sharing is a proven method of reducing 
the cost of living and can substitute for in­
dividual vehicle ownership. In markets with 
car-sharing availability, car-sharing partici­
pants typically use shared vehicles for non-
work trips and increase their transit patron­
age for work trips, resulting in significant 
reduction in the cost of living along with 
increase in transit patronage. Three vendors 
currently offer shared cars in Albuquerque. 
ZipCar operates at two locations, both on 
the UNM Campus, Enterprise CarShare 
operates at two locations near Sunport, 
and Turo, offers peer-to-peer car-sharing, a 
method of opting-in privately owned vehi­
cles into a collective fleet. BICI and Zagster 
have operated bike-sharing in Albuquerque 
for two years. Currently, multiple shared-
bicycles are offered at 15 locations, 14 along 
or close to Central Avenue, and one at the 
National Hispanic Cultural Museum, with 
an average of 5 bicycles per location.
Albuquerque should consider significant 
incentives to boost the demand for and 
utilization of shared mobility, including:
•	
Provide parking spaces for shared 
vehicles.
•	
Integrate car-share and bike-share access 
passes with pre-paid transit access passes.
•	
Adopt a Transportation Demand Man­
agement Program.
•	
Provide a web tool that helps people 
more easily see available traditional 
(bus) and non-traditional (car-share, 
bike-share, ride-share) services in a single 
portal. 
•	
Expand carsharing for use in municipal 
fleets, which during evening and week­
end hours are available for community 
rental. 
•	
Pursue funding for “mobility hubs” that 
provide a cluster of transit and shared-
use mobility. Explore partnerships with 
large vehicle manufacturers, all of whom 
have divisions within their companies to 
explore shared mobility options.
         Downtown              University	
    Nob Hill	
        International District	
	
      East Gateway


220 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
 B.04
Public trust is lacking in some 
of the relationships surrounding 
transit in Albuquerque. 
Social equity and inclusion are based, in 
part, on the community's ability to have a 
voice in community decisions and a choice 
about the wellbeing of their neighborhood. 
The benefits of transit oriented development 
are not always legible and compelling to the 
broader community, inhibiting the financial 
support to optimize the City's investment in 
infrastructure. 









221
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
 A.04 
1.	
Build public trust. Utilize events like 
the March 2017 Workshop Week to 
collaborate as a community regarding 
transit. 
2.	
Create a dashboard of key perfor­
mance measures to track progress 
toward economic, social and environ­
mental benefits from improved trans­
portation services, placemaking and 
livability initiatives along the Central 
Avenue ART.
3.	
Disclose the current transportation 
cost-of-living in advertisements for 
rental and sale housing. Create a forum 
for owners, developer/investors and 
renters to better understand this value. 
Require this information in existing 
financial counseling linked to actions 
that residents can take to reduce trans­
portation outlays.
4.	
Disclose potential affordability 
and tax yield impacts of contending 
scenarios for future development in 
Albuquerque.
