222 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
FUNDING POTENTIAL: PARTNERSHIPS AND VALUE CAPTURE
ANALYSIS SUGGESTS THE NEW BUS RAPID TRANSIT LINE (ART) 
COULD SPARK A POTENTIAL $2.9 BILLION OF REAL ESTATE (RE)IN­
VESTMENT AND GENERATE SAVINGS OF AN ESTIMATED $1 BILLION 
FROM POVERTY REDUCTION, IMPROVED TRANSIT ACCESS AND 
OTHER EFFICIENCIES THAT BENEFIT EVERYONE IN ALBUQUERQUE. 
THE ART INVESTMENT IS EXPECTED TO CATALYZE JOB CREATION OF 
MORE THAN 9,500 JOBS ALONG THE CORRIDOR.
THIS SECTION PRIORITIZES INCENTIVES AND PUBLIC SECTOR 
PROJECT PIPELINES FOR HIGH YIELD DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS 
OUTLINED IN THE STATION AREA CHAPTERS OF THIS ACTION PLAN, 
WITH RECOMMENDED ACTIONS TO STRUCTURE PUBLIC SECTOR FI­
NANCING AND FUNDING MECHANISMS.
FINANCE
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


223
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
Additionally, Albuquerque has under-
utilized existing federal programs, as well 
as these new public resources probable to 
emerge:
+
+
Federal credit assistance for trans­
portation and transportation-related 
investment including the Transporta­
tion Innovative Finance Investment 
Act (TIFIA) funds, and Transportation 
Investment Generating Recovery Act 
(TIGER) Funds.
+
+
Funds appropriated as a result of natu­
ral disasters ranging from flooding to 
drought.
+
+
Funds to meet a national housing 
policy goal such as that established by 
the new regulations accompanying the 
Fair Housing Act, intended to increase 
affordability and reduce segregation.
+
+
Funds for the planned restructuring of 
the nation’s Government Sponsored 
Enterprises, including Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac.
This section first looks at the return on 
investment of the Central Avenue bus rapid 
transit in terms of increased property tax per 
acre, then identifies financial barriers along 
with actions to optimize value capture. g
The City typically receives revenue from its 
right to levy taxes and fees, from formula-
based apportionments that determine 
annual funding levels, or by competing 
for intergovernmental discretionary funds. 
This section proposes complementing those 
measures by actions that:
+
+
Intensify taxable development around 
transit stations.
+
+
Borrow against the likely resulting tax 
receipts to generate real time working 
cash.
+
+
Build wholesale allocations of credit 
through risk sharing mechanisms made 
available by Government Sponsored 
Enterprises.
+
+
Build effective demand for lending 
by local lenders and local branches of 
national lenders.
+
+
Exercise Albuquerque’s right to bid 
on flexible funds being made available 
through NMDOT and MRCOG for 
which priority can be granted due to 
the FHWA’s designation of Albuquer­
que as a Safety-Focus City based on the 
high crash rate along Central Avenue.
+
+
Secure potential support from the 
insurance industry in the form of 
premium or rate reductions as a result 
of implementation of complete street 
design that results in reduction of ac­
cidents and increased safety.
These sorts of strategic actions are intended 
to bolster private sector investments as well 
as revenues derived from Central Avenue 
BRT investments.
ALBUQUERQUE IS EXPERIENCING TWO SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN 
THE WAY IT GUIDES FUTURE GROWTH: A REVISION OF THE CITYWIDE 
ZONING CODE AND A MAJOR TRANSPORTATION INVESTMENT ALONG 
CENTRAL AVENUE. FINANCE STRATEGIES SHOULD SUPPORT POSI­
TIVE CHANGE FOR THE MAIN STREET OF THE ALBUQUERQUE METRO.
REVENUE AND RETURNS
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


224 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
IMPACT OF TRANSIT
To call Albuquerque a unique city is an understatement. New Mexico’s culture and natural environment is 
not replicated elsewhere in the United States. As the state’s largest city and economic center, Albuquerque 
has many unique assets. However, Albuquerque shares similar challenges with countless cities across the 
American Sunbelt. To combat these challenges, such as cost of providing services, traffic congestion and ac­
cess to economic opportunity, investments in multi-modal transportation has broken ground along the Cen­
tral Avenue corridor. The Albuquerque Rapid Transit line will undoubtedly encourage new higher-density, 
walkable, mixed-use development within station areas. Albuquerque and Bernalillo County will be amongst 
the primary benefactors of new development and its additional tax production. What type of property tax 
revenue can the community expect to receive after ART is completed?
This section addresses the financial impact of dense development 
and the benefits of access to transit. Property tax data was utilitzed 
and the 3D value per acre model used as a foundation to forecast 
future property tax production after the completion of the ART line 
along Central Avenue.
The results of the analysis were clear. Unassuming, incremental 
residential developments were shown to generate potent tax value to 
the community. Two and three-story townhome/condominium de­
velopments in the Central Avenue corridor proved to produce more 
than 10-15 times the property tax revenue of a standard big box on 
a per-acre basis. Perhaps even more encouraging for the future of 
ART and its planning efforts is the amount of value already added 
within the corridor over the last 10 years, which outpaces the rest of 
the City. It is estimated that after full buildout (15-20 years), rede­
velopment nodes along the corridor will produce $2.8M - $15M in 
total annual property tax production.
The foundation of the analysis is the value per acre method. Utiliz­
ing property tax data from Bernalillo County, property tax values 
of each parcel were processed, analyzed and visualized in a 3D Tax 
Value per Acre model. Taking into account how much land a par­
ticular development consumes enables different types of properties, 
in different parts of the community to be compared in an apples to 
apples manner. The more land a parcel consumes, the more public 
services it requires (streets, utilities, etc.). 
FORECASTING FUTURE VALUE ALONG CENTRAL AVENUE 
3D Tax Value per Acre in the Greater Central Avenue Corridor, 2015
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


225
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
TOTAL TAX VALUE 
"Miles per Tank"
TAX VALUE PER ACRE
"Miles per Gallon"
3D TAX VALUE PER ACRE
This method of efficiency is not a foreign concept. In regards to au­
tomobile efficiency, the gallon is utilized as a unit of measure. Dif­
ferent cars have differently-sized gas tanks, so we use the gallon as a 
measurement of efficiency, not the size of the tank. In other words, 
we use miles per gallon, not miles per tank to make a relative com­
parison of cars and trucks. Using a per acre metric for land helps to 
better understand the potency of one parcel against its neighbor, as 
well as the entire city and county. 
Visualizing tax value trends in 3D enables a different perspective 
on development across the community. Much of Albuquerque’s 
recent growth has occurred on the periphery of the city in the form 
of large, single-use subdivisions, which require equally large public 
investments in streets and other municipal services. Amid the sea of 
expansive suburban development, however, dense urban develop­
ments have begun to spring up in Downtown Albuquerque and 
along Central Avenue. Many of these developments show up as 
purple values in the tax model, the highest value per acres in Berna­
lillo County. Put simply, these are the most revenue potent proper­
ties. 100 Gold Avenue is one such development, reaching $29.8M 
per acre, the highest value per acre in Bernalillo County and over 
30 times the property tax potency of a standard big box shopping 
center. 
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


226 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
VALUE PER ACRE
2005
2017
TAX VALUE PER ACRE 
Central Ave. Corridor, 2005
VACANT PARCELS 
Central Ave. Corridor, 2017
PROJECTED TAX VALUE PER ACRE 
Central Ave. Corridor, 2017
The focal point of the analytics were conducted along the Greater 
Central Avenue corridor. Half-mile buffers around each ART station 
were used to create a sphere of influence. The parcels in these half-
mile zones are generally within walking distance of a station, and 
thus have direct access to transit. 
Certain characteristics in the urban environment can have a sig­
nificant influence on development, property values and taxes. The 
impending arrival of ART along Albuquerque’s primary thorough­
fare certainly suffices as an asset and amenity for future real estate 
development. Studies have shown that every community that re­
ceives a viable transit option with a high level of service experiences 
an increase in new development around stations, especially in urban 
cores. Albuquerque Rapid Transit provides a significant opportunity 
to catalyze new tax base around station areas. 
Higher-density, mixed-use developments have already impacted 
tax yield along the corridor, particularly in Nob Hill. The 3D Tax 
Models above visualize value per acre trends in the corridor today, 
compared with prior conditions in 2005. Not every purple spike 
represents a large development project. Much of the growth in the 
corridor, particularly in EDo and Nob Hill, has come in the form 
of two and three-story structures. There are many opportunities 
for infill redevelopment in the area as well. The map below shows 
the distribution of vacant parcels across the corridor. Single-story 
structures with historical value and significance can be preserved, 
while new, urban developments are added to the area. Introducing 
access to transit in these neighborhoods will increase the number 
of developments and housing units in the area, which will not only 
generate new property taxes but also increase commercial activity 
and consumer spending along Central Avenue. 
Total Tax Value: $2.09B
Total Tax Value: $2.55B
Central Ave
Vacant Parcel
I-25
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


227
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
Coors Blvd
Downtown | EDo
University
Nob Hill
International 
District
REDEVELOPMENT PROBABILITY KEY
MEDIUM
$73M
HIGH
$113M
LOW
$22M
54%
LIKELIHOOD OF DEVELOPMENT
35%
11%
REDEVELOPMENT AREAS 
Central Ave. Corridor
PROJECTED ANNUAL ASSESSED BUILDING VALUE 
2-Story Development across all areas
To estimate future tax production from new real estate develop­
ment, this plan blended property tax data of existing conditions, 
market research, development figures which estimated the future 
building square footage added by varying designs in the station area 
chapters of this plan. Property tax production was forecasted for 
four redevelopment areas: Coors, Downtown-EDo, the University 
area, Nob Hill, and the International District (below). Sites within 
each area were a assigned a degree of redevelopment likelihood 
within the station area chapters. Each parcel shown in red is likely 
to be redeveloped, yellow parcels have a moderate probability of 
redevelopment, and areas shown in blue have a low chance of being 
redeveloped. These characteristics were taken into consideration 
as development and building value was projected into the future. 
100% of land with a high-probability was forecasted to be devel­
oped over the first 10 years, while 50% of moderate likelihood land 
was estimated to be redeveloped (beginning year 6, through year 
15). Only 10% of land with a low probability of redevelopment was 
projected to receive new building construction, with values assigned 
year 15 through 20. The chart to the right visualizes the incremental 
addition of building value into the marketplace. Despite having a 
relatively small physical footprint in the corridor, high-probability 
sites account for over 50% of all estimated future value. 
High
Medium
Low
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


228 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
Current Conditions: Central and Girard
Illustrative Potential: Central and Girard, 
Existing conditions above
TAX VALUE PER ACRE 
Nob Hill, 2017
PROJECTED TAX VALUE PER ACRE 
Nob Hill, 2027
3-STORY
1-STORY
2-STORY
ESTIMATED TOTAL ANNUAL  
PROPERTY TAX PRODUCTION
Nob Hill Redevelopment Area
Redeveloping Nob Hill's key sites 
as two-story structures would 
produce over $6.1M more tax dol­
lars to the community over 20 
years. 
Nob Hill provides an excellent example of how future density 
impacts property value and property tax revenue production. The 
chart below illustrates the cumulative difference in property tax 
production over twenty years after the completion of ART. It is as­
sumed that Nob Hill’s key sites (sites that have a high to moderate 
probability of redevelopment) would bring $6.1M more tax dollars 
to the community if developed as three-story development over 20 
years when compared to one-story development. Additional value 
is produced not just from building height, but also incorporating 
a mix of uses into the same structure. Mixed-use developments, 
particularly in vacant parcels, are estimated to bring considerably 
greater value per acre than single-story structures. Nob Hill’s future 
redevelopment and subsequent fiscal conditions were visualized as a 
forecasted value per acre model below. Even encouraging two-story 
infill redevelopment in the neighborhood will generate wealth simi­
lar to what Downtown Albuquerque produces today. 
Central Ave.
Central Ave.
2027
2017
VALUE PER ACRE
Total Tax Value: $74M
Total Tax Value: $284M
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


229
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
FINANCIAL BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION
FUNDING POTENTIAL
ART has the potential to contribute to 
economic vitality and reduction of pov­
erty. A recent study found that improved 
jobs access, household expense reduction, 
attracting and retaining jobs-near-transit, 
workforce development from infrastruc­
ture investments could reduce the number 
of people in poverty in Albuquerque by 
21,123. The cost of living reduction from 
enhanced transportation choice as the 
result of ART, the Integrated Development 
Ordinance, and from the city’s commitment 
to transit oriented development can benefit 
households and businesses along Central 
Avenue and throughout Albuquerque.
Three separate analyses performed for the 
City of Albuquerque, “The Scale of the 
Prize” by Center for Neighborhood Tech­
nology in 2016, the IDO Retail Review by 
the Gibbs Group in 2016, and the Review 
of Central Avenue TOD Plans by Urban3 
in 2017, show that tax value per acre of 
development is up to 30 times higher under 
the new Integrated Development Ordi­
nance, depending on site use and intensity. 
This section looks at the financial barriers to 
achieving this added value.
Transit and walkable urban places reduce 
the cost of living and increase return on 
the City's infrastructure investments. Resi­
dents currently spend $2.4 billion annu­
ally on transportation, or $72 billion over 
30 years. The potential exists for ART to re­
sult in $1 billion in household savings over 
its first decade of operations, thanks to re­
duced travel needs because of transit, bik­
ing, and walking. The new transit line is es­
timated to catalyze a potential $2.9 billion 
of real estate development and to catalyze 
job creation of more than 9,500 jobs along 
the corridor. However, funding barriers ex­
ist to realizing both the reduction in house­
hold expenditures and the increase in de­
velopment activity. 
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


230 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
DOWNTOWN ALBUQUERQUE	
	
	
	
	
PHOTO FREEABQIMAGES.COM
 B.01
Public funding does not prioritize 
walkable, transit-served urbanism. 
The higher property tax per acre demon­
strated for the walkable urbanism in the 
previous pages is not aligned with public 
funding priorities.
 A.01 
Make Premium Transit Corridors a priority 
for public investment, and seek prioritiza­
tion by lenders in dedicating resources 
to TOD. The Integrated Development 
Ordinance specifies Central Avenue as a 
Premium Transit Corridor, creating a prior­
ity zone for investors, developers and public 
agencies. The demand for energy, water, 
stormwater management and transportation 
services will change with intensification of 
these corridors. Also changing is technology, 
making it possible to significantly increase 
the efficiency of use in these resources. 
Anchor institutions and major employers 
are developing ecodistricts of integrated sets 
of utility services within their properties, 
which along with an increasing demand for 
greener living, is changing how and where 
to build. 
Albuquerque should convene utility manag­
ers, technology innovators, and investors 
including NM-MFA, NMDOT, MRCOG, 
Workforce Housing Trust Fund and CDFIs, 
to explore methods of prioritizing invest­
ment along the ART to maximize net public 
benefit. This should include representa­
tives of governing bodies and of the New 
Mexico Public Regulation Commission. To 
the extent that capital access is a barrier to 
advancing place-based utility services, the 
city should explore uses of pre-development 
funds designed to address this purpose.
 B.02
Public funding sources are not in 
place to implement this Action 
Plan. 
The 1978 New Mexico Tax Increment for 
Development Act authorizes the creation of 
Tax Increment for Development Districts 
(TIDDs) which can finance against future 
stream revenue for local infrastructure devel­
opment. This could include municipal and 
utility services infrastructure along the ART, 
expanded transit services including service 
extensions, expanded services intended fill 
“first and last mile” gaps in the system, and 
construction of the walkability and bikabil­
ity amenities identified and designed in the 
station area chapters of this plan. 
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


231
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
 A.02 
Create a Tax Increment for Development 
District (TIDD) within the Central Avenue 
Premium Transit Corridor. 
The City should convene a working group 
of finance experts and key community lead­
ers to help specify an enabling mechanism 
that can help maximize leverage on the 
funding streams generated by the creation of 
a corridor TIDD.
A community-led TIDD must be approved 
by city council, with signatures of at least 
50 percent of the owners of real property 
in the proposed district along with the ap­
proved plan. The City of Albuquerque can 
also adopt a resolution on its own accord to 
form a district without the petition. The de­
velopment plan must outline how the plan 
will stabilize the local economy, help create 
jobs, accommodate schools and housing, 
and generate tax revenues for improvements. 
In addition, the project must demonstrate 
innovative planning, incorporate sustainable 
principals, and fit with the long-term plan­
ning of the local government.  
Once a district has been formed and a board 
elected, the state will recognize the district 
as a political subdivision separate from the 
municipality and divert the incremental 
revenue. If a district is using gross receipts 
tax revenue, the Taxation and Revenue De­
partment will divert the state’s share of gross 
receipts tax collection as well as the incre­
ment if approved by the Board of Finance. 
To approve the gross receipts tax diversion, 
the board must find that approving the in­
crement is in the best interest of the state and 
will create jobs and generate new revenue 
through increased economic activity.  https://
www.nmlegis.gov/Entity/LFC/Documents/
Finance_Facts/finance%20facts%20tidd.pdf
ESTIMATING POTENTIAL YIELD 
FROM A CENTRAL AVENUE TIDD
A conservative estimate of development 
value along Central Avenue from infill and 
redevelopment is $2.9 billion, based on cost 
of land plus construction, see below. Local 
developers indicate a market value of 1.26 
times that amount, an assessment basis of 
one-third of market value, and a typical levy 
of 1 percent of assessed value yields an esti­
mated annual levelized property tax stream 
of $12.3 million. Presuming that the ratio of 
gross receipts tax yield to property tax yield 
is on a par with that received citywide,  the 
total yield of gross receipts tax and property 
tax would average $43.1 million annually.
Projected Development Value
That is an amount, for illustration pur­
poses only, that would amortize $851 
million structured in a 30 year financing 
at 3 percent interest rate (or $670 million 
at 5 percent, respectively). This amount is 
a conservative estimate. The basis for the 
estimated market value of $2.93 billion in 
construction and $3.69 billion in market 
value is the development intensity allowed 
under the pre-IDO zoning.
Urban3 estimated the increase in value re­
sulting from the re-use of vacant land within 
the buffer created by the Premium Transit 
Corridor designation of Central Avenue in 
the newly approved IDO for certain repre­
sentative station areas.
In this scenario, taxable market value of 
$3.69 billion is being added to an initial 
value of $5.34 billion spread along the 
15 mile Central Avenue corridor within a 
5/8 mile buffer from Unser to Tramway, 
resulting in a total corridor market value of 
$9,032,805,989. This is an overall incre­
ment amounting to 69 percent of current 
market value. 
This conservatively assumed no increase or 
change (e.g. from depreciation of non-
redevelopment property) over the projected 
periods. Under this scenario, if full devel­
opment can be accomplished within 10 
years, the annual increase in market value of 
property would be 6.9 percent. If build out 
occurs over 20 years, the rate drops to 3.45 
percent.
STATION
TYPE
NEW
RESI­
DENTS
NEW 
RES. 
UNITS
NEW 
OFFICE 
JOBS
NEW 
RETAIL 
JOBS
LAND PLUS 
CONSTRUC­
TION COST
MARKET 
VALUE
Urban
2,169
1,146
5,108
1,664
$917,219,750 
$1,155,696,885 
Transitional
3,003
1,444
573
502
$331,424,286 
$417,594,600 
Suburban
12,263
4,690
432
1,313
$1,683,798,595
$2,121,586,230 
Total
17,435
7,280
6,113
3,479
$2,932,442,631 
$3,694,877,715 
5/8 MILE ART CORRIDOR
VALUE
NOB HILL (URBAN3)
VALUE
2015 Total Assessed Value
$5.34 billion
2017 Total Assessed Value
$74 million 
Projected Value of
New Development
$3.69 billion
Projected Value of
New Development 
$210 million 
New Total Assessed Value
$9.03 billion
2027 Total Assessed Value
$284 million
Percent Increase
69%
Percent Increase
284%
10 year Build Out
6.9%
10 year Build Out
28%
20 year Build Out
3.5%
20 year Build Out
14%
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


232 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
Not all areas of Central Avenue will achieve 
the same levels of development intensity. 
Referring to the analysis by Urban3 of po­
tential development intensity and value in a 
constrained area adjacent to Central Avenue 
within the Nob Hill community, it would 
be misleading to suggest that the IDO 
would result in equivalent high potential 
value-per-acre across the entire 15-mile cor­
ridor. However, because the total inventory 
of potentially re-developable land is larger in 
the Suburban station areas than in either the 
Urban or Transitional areas, a larger poten­
tial increase in aggregate value could occur. 
While the station areas and neighborhoods 
further to the east and west are of overall 
lower density and activity levels now than is 
the case with station areas Downtown and 
in nearby neighborhoods, there is consider­
ably more land susceptible to redevelopment 
in those currently lower density areas to the 
east and to the west.  
On a sensitivity analysis basis, over the full 
15 mile corridor, compared with the prior 
zoning, if the IDO entitles two times the 
development intensity allowable under prior 
zoning, this would result in an incremen­
tal market valuation of $7.38 billion, an 
incremental assessed value of $2.46 billion, 
and a tax increment yield from the combi­
nation of increased property taxes and Gross 
Receipts Taxes of $86.2 million annually 
or $7.18 million monthly. This amount 
could amortize a total of $1.71 billion at a 
3 percent interest rate, or $1.325 billion at 
5 percent. 
If the rate of increase in valuation implied 
by the Nob Hill analysis is representative, 
then 4 times the development intensity pre­
viously allowed, all other things being equal, 
would double those amounts yet again.
The recent update to population and jobs 
projections suggests that prudence should 
be exercised in making these calculations. 
Neighborhoods with strong potential de­
mand could experience rapid development, 
and in those cases a 10 year build out may 
be feasible. Absent growth in the regional 
employment base it may take 20 years over­
all to achieve Central Avenue infill potential.
GETTING STARTED ON A
CENTRAL AVENUE TIDD
The City can, under current law, establish 
a Central Avenue TIDD to set the table for 
this financing. It might choose to dedicate 
a portion, say one-half to General Fund 
purposes, and one-half to a set of purposes 
to further the City’s goals associated with 
better transportation choices and station 
area development. 
That second half could also be structured 
to favor projects which can further attract 
matching funds various grant-making and 
lending sources, whether public, private or 
both. This would result in an increase in 
available funds compared to simply spend­
ing down the bond proceeds. 
It might be branded as the Central Avenue 
Community Benefits Bank, and it could be 
replicated as advanced transportation ser­
vices are programmed along the other two 
Premium Transit Corridors, Paseo del Norte 
and University/I25/Jefferson. 
The City should form a working group to 
further explore and recommend specifica­
tions for this financing source.
 B.03
Land assembly can be challenging 
because of the historic character 
of many of the properties along 
Central Avenue. 
Often individual lots are too small to ac­
commodate the required structured parking 
that is needed to achieve the higher yield 
form of a walkable urban place, as detailed 
in the sections of this action plan that are 
specific to individual station areas.
 A.03 
Create mechanisms for effective land as­
sembly, which may include land trusts, land 
banks, pre-development funds to reactivate 
underutilized properties. The availability 
of land along Central Avenue for higher 
density, mixed use, walkable urbanism is 
significant, assuming half of surface parking 
is available for development.
LAND SUSCEPTIBLE
TO INFILL
URBAN
TRANSI­
TIONAL
SUBURBAN
TOTAL STA­
TION AREA
Vacant Acres
23.19
26.97
387.86
438.02
Underutilized Lots
80.73
83.32
631.52
795.57
Parking
8.91
3.56
2.69
15.16
Underutilized Less
Half Parking
76.28
81.54
630.18
788
 Vacant + Underutilized
99.47
108.51
1018.04
1226.02
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


233
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
Properties can become vacant for many rea­
sons: abandonment, demolition of previous 
buildings, tax liens resulting from delin­
quency and non-payment, and tax foreclo­
sure. Property may have been purchased for 
public improvements or for buildings that 
was never utilized, or legacy public facilities 
such as schools may have been subject to 
consolidation, among other reasons. 
Many cities and counties nationally have 
created programs to ease disposition and 
sometimes assembly for redevelopment of 
vacant properties. In some states, the right 
for local government to enter “non cash 
bids” for such properties is a mechanism 
intended to facilitate property reuse. Prop­
erty taxation and disposition of property 
is handled by the State of New Mexico 
through the New Mexico Taxation and Rev­
enue Department and by Bernalillo County. 
Since volumes of available vacant properties 
are large and because of the complications 
of land assembly, various jurisdictions and 
organizations have developed specialized 
programs to aid in this task.
LAND BANKS
A land bank acquires, holds, and transfers 
interest in real property to promote rede­
velopment and reuse of vacant, abandoned, 
foreclosed or tax-delinquent properties; sup­
ports targeted efforts to stabilize neighbor­
hoods; and stimulates residential, commer­
cial and industrial development, all in ways 
that are consistent with goals and priorities 
established by local government partners 
and other community stakeholders. 
Working independently with the request of 
municipal and other partners, land banks 
acquire properties, liens, notes or deeds 
through purchase, donation, forfeiture and 
other transfers. Land banks will hold title 
and maintain properties tax free, will extin­
guish delinquent taxes and liens as permit­
ted by law, and, in some cases, demolish/
deconstruct buildings, with the intent of 
preparing property for conveyance back to 
the market or to other uses. Land banks will 
also lease/adopt interim uses for properties 
as necessary and appropriate.  
LAND TRUSTS
Land trusts are mechanisms that can provide 
for the separate ownership of land from 
the buildings on top of that land, result­
ing in increased stability of ownership and 
community character over time (see http://
community-wealth.org/strategies/panel/
clts/index.html). Over 120 such organiza­
tions, non- profit organizations which have 
Section 501c3 federal tax exemptions, are 
members of the National Community Land 
Trust Network which joined forces this year 
with Cornerstone Partnership to form the 
Grounded Solutions Network. See www.
citnetwork.org. 
There is one urban community land trust 
in Albuquerque, the Sawmill Community 
Land Trust, covering 27 acres north of 
Uptown and south of I-40. The Trust is 
described at http://www.sawmillclt.org/ and 
a case study is at http://albuquerque.about.
com/od/neighborhoods/i/landtrusts.htm .
Other New Mexico Community Land 
Trusts include the La Mesa and Mil Abrazos 
CLTs in Albuquerque; the Santa Fe Com­
munity Housing Trust in Santa Fe, and the 
Tierra Madre in Sunland Park, in Dona Ana 
County. These are all described with contact 
information at http://www.centerforneweco­
nomics.org/content/community-land-trusts-
directory.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT FUND
+
+
Create and support a new fund that 
can blend patient capital from the city, 
Bernalillo County, MRCOG, utilities 
such as PNM, the water authority and 
social impact investors including foun­
dations to help finance the acquisition 
and pre-development improvements of 
such properties. 
+
+
Create a profile for Albuquerque as 
a nexus of opportunities for emerg­
ing impact investor consideration and 
targeting.
+
+
Create a finance design forum to 
develop a pre-development financing 
mechanism for Central Avenue and 
other Premium Transit Corridors in 
Albuquerque. 
The need for pre-development financing ex­
ists because it can take from 5 to 7 years to 
acquire, entitle, prepare, construct and fully 
occupy higher density mixed use proper­
ties. This is known as the pre-development 
period. No mechanism currently exists in 
Albuquerque to help finance these activities, 
which both raises the cost to develop and 
lowers the likelihood of success. 
IMPACT INVESTING PROVIDES 
NEW RESOURCES FOR DOING 
WELL AND DOING GOOD
During the last two years, there has been 
tremendous interest nationally on the 
part of foundations and socially-screened 
investment funds in impact investing. For 
example, the Ford Foundation announced 
that it would devote 12 percent of its assets 
or $1 billion toward impact investments. A 
new association, the Mission Investors Ex­
change, has been created to serve as a forum 
for this investment practice as well as to 
highlight specific investment opportunities. 
Summaries by leading investor/practitioners 
are published monthly in the Stanford So­
cial Impact Review in a new series, Mission 
Possible. Impact investing is also known as 
“pay for success” financing. The basic idea is 
to “purchase” the outcome desired, defined 
by a pre-determined set of performance 
measures.
DOUBLE BOTTOM LINE INVEST­
MENT FUNDS
Similarly, in the late 1990s, the Bay Area 
Family of Funds was created to provide such 
resources to help address poverty in that 
region’s 42 communities which exhibited 
persistent poverty. Investments could ad­
dress such opportunities as transit oriented 
development, small business development 
and land recycling. $200 million was raised 
from banks, corporations, foundations 
and government for this purpose. Three 
investment funds were managed by SEC 
registered investment advisors, who in turn 
agreed to use “double bottom line” term 
sheets which addressed both profitability 
and a set of community-defined benefits. 
Inspired by this effort and an earlier one in 
Massachusetts dedicated to creative financ­
ing of affordable housing, some $5 billion 
was invested through such funds in the early 
2000s across the United States. 
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


234 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Similar community-conscious investments 
capitalize a variety of revolving loan funds, 
community development banks, credit 
unions, and venture capital funds. Col­
lectively, these are known today as Com­
munity Development Financial Institutions 
(CDFIs), which are eligible for federal 
investment and capital access to resources 
from the CDFI Fund operated by the U.S. 
Department of the Treasury. There are 14 
CDFIs in New Mexico, of which Accion 
New Mexico, New Mexico Community 
Capital, New Mexico Community Develop­
ment Loan Fund, Ventana Fund and the 
Women’s Economic Self-Sufficiency Team 
are located in Albuquerque. Since 1996, 
the CDFI Fund has awarded $36 million 
in grants to New Mexico CDFIs and an 
additional $201 million in New Markets 
Tax Credits has been awarded to these same 
organizations. See: http://www.cdfi.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/New-Mexico-.pdf 
PRE-DEVELOPMENT FINANCING 
BOOSTS AFFORDABLE TOD FEA­
SIBILITY: PRECEDENTS
Several precedents for equitable pre-devel­
opment financing provide models that may 
be useful in Albuquerque.
The Transit Oriented Affordable Housing 
(TOAH) Fund operates in the San Francisco 
Bay Area. It was created out of a stakeholder 
engagement process known as the Great 
Communities Collaborative at the San Fran­
cisco Foundation, a community foundation. 
The Fund was capitalized initially with $50 
million, with an initial $10 million from 
the Metropolitan Transportation Commis­
sion, that region’s metropolitan planning 
organization (the equivalent of MRCOG 
in Albuquerque) and of the remainder, half 
from a network of six Community Develop­
ment Financial Institutions plus the Ford 
Foundation and local community founda­
tions, and half by Citibank and Morgan 
Stanley. The Fund is managed by one of the 
CDFIs, the Low Income Investment Fund. 
It purchases and arranges for the financing 
of pre-development costs associated with de­
veloping affordable housing within walking 
distance of mass transportation. Property 
is held for up to seven years to give each 
affordable housing developer the “runway” 
to fully entitle, build, operate and “rent up,” 
at which time the property will be conveyed 
back to the developer. In effect, this creates 
an off-balance-sheet finance mechanism for 
risk sharing in the development of afford­
able TOD. 
A similar fund is operated by Enterprise 
Community Partners in Denver, the TOD 
Fund, and others are under consideration or 
in development in Seattle, Los Angeles and 
Boston. See: http://bayareatod.com/ 
The Reinvent Phoenix project developed 
a citywide comprehensive plan focused on 
station areas and equitable TOD within 
their light rail corridor. As part of that ef­
fort, a design for such a fund was crafted 
to provide pre-development capital for 
infrastructure in areas served by transit with 
insufficient infrastructure quality or capac­
ity. This is envisioned as a longer-range com­
mitment that is not yet funded in Phoenix. 
A recent summary presentation is at: http://
www.summit.ecodistricts.org/wp-content/
uploads/2017/03/1-Beyond-TIF.pdf
 B.04
Financial instruments are better 
equipped to fund single use sub­
urban development patterns. This 
action plan addresses the need for 
marketplace readiness to finance 
the market-preferred walkable 
urban product types.  
Achieving the opportunity associated with 
developing the estimated $2.9 billion in 
construction along ART over a 10 to 20 
year period will result in the design, permit­
ting, and construction of between 51 and 
102 buildings per year.
There is relatively little local experience with 
developing, investing in, and approving 
such development. The availability of capital 
from depository financial institutions such 
as banks and savings and loans has been 
constrained since the recession. Lenders are 
dependent upon secondary market purchas­
es by the two large Government Sponsored 
Enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, 
and advance funds provided by the 11 Dis­
trict Banks of the Federal Home Loan Bank 
System, and on the ability to secure loan 
insurance provided by the Federal Housing 
Administration. There are limits on how 
much space in a mixed use building can be 
commercial if purchased by Fannie Mae 
or Freddie Mac or insured by FHA which 
result in minimum heights of 4, 5 or 10 
stories respectively. FHA and Freddie Mac 
have pilot programs intended to lower these 
heights and restriction which can address 
this barrier.
 A.04 
+
+
Create a finance forum to nurture a 
larger pool of effective investors and 
developers by building awareness of 
and competency in using emerging best 
practices. Use this forum to make con­
nections within a working community 
of practice in Albuquerque focused on 
making walkable urban development 
patterns a reality. 
+
+
Open regular channels of communica­
tion with “wholesale” lenders and credit 
enhancement resources and financial 
services regulators including FHA, 
Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, and the 
Federal Housing Finance Agency.
+
+
Enlist FHA, Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae 
and the Federal Home Loan Bank of 
Dallas to support for innovative finance 
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


235
POTENTIAL AMENDMENT TO ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
and portfolio purchase of lower-rise 
higher-density mixed-use TOD along 
Central Avenue. Use these credit-
enhancement and risk-sharing tools to 
better use “home grown” capital sources 
including local credit unions, banks 
and community development financial 
institutions.
+
+
Build awareness of the potential mar­
ket demand in Albuquerque among 
financial services institutions and build 
capacity of developers and investors to 
use these tools.
+
+
Use Current Federal, State and Re­
gional Interest in Safety to Support 
Walkable Urbanism Use Albuquerque’s 
FHWA Safety-Focus Cities designa­
tion to accelerate investment in safe 
walkable urbanism. Designate TIDD 
proceeds to help secure the future of 
locally-owned businesses.
A handful of sophisticated developers in 
Albuquerque are finding capital for individ­
ual projects from credit unions. Affordable 
housing developers are further able to use 
Low Income Housing Tax Credits granted 
competitively by the Mortgage Finance 
Authority of New Mexico, which was used 
by Geltmore LLC and Yes Housing in 
developing the Imperial downtown. The 
Affordable Housing Grants Program of the 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas provides 
10 percent of its annual profits for such pur­
poses, used recently, for example, for seniors 
housing in Santa Fe by the Santa Fe Civic 
Housing Authority and to develop Village 
in the Bosque in the town of Bernalillo. 
A finance forum should be convened to 
build awareness of and competency in us­
ing such emerging best practices and build 
a working community of practice around 
those in Albuquerque focused on making 
the desired walkable urban development 
pattern a reality. 
The proposed forum would build compe­
tency among a broader range of developers 
and investors to use these tools thereby ac­
celerating the pipeline of infill projects along 
the Central Avenue ART and generally 
along the Premium Transit Corridors. 
PROJECT 
PIPELINE
Prioritized public sector project pipeline for 
various station area investments brought to 
light during this planning process:
SHORT TERM
Smaller commercial spaces in Atrisco and 
Coors for local business incubation and 
acceleration.
Pedestrian connections between Old Town 
and both Central Avenue and Tiguex Park.
Temporary testing of street section designed 
for Romero at Plaza Street in Old Town.
Historically appropriate shade structure at 
Walter Street station.
Safe pedestrian and cycling routes in Uni­
versity area, considering demographics.
Preserve the character of Nob Hill, protect­
ing historic and contributing structures 
from tear-downs.
NEAR TERM
Coors area projects that bolster a sense of 
place, a strong center, and meaningful loca­
tions for community events. 
Community spaces in Atrisco for gathering 
and celebrating special cultural occasions.
Remove parking requirements for 30' deep 
buildings to enable infill of the city parking 
lot at Central Avenue.
Implement the Downtown Walkability Study 
in Downtown and EDo.
Build makerspaces along the tracks in EDo 
to support growing small businesses.
Implement shared parking across multiple 
sites and owners in EDo.
Improve pedestrian and bicycle connections 
between EDo and Downtown.
Support development of the south edge of 
UNM to create safe and engaging spaces 
along Central Avenue.
Support local-serving commercial shops and 
eating establishments, not drive-throughs, 
in University.
Support Central and Girard as a gateway to 
Nob Hill, active with people and reflecting 
community character.
International district projects that build a 
sense of place, a strong center, and meaning­
ful locations for community events.
EXPO New Mexico site projects that move 
the land toward becoming the City’s “Cen­
tral Park.”
LONG TERM
Encourage a diversity of building types to 
ensure inclusive neighborhoods in all station 
areas.
Focus on Downtown development along 
Central Avenue to maintain a continuous 
vibrant pedestrian and retail experience.
Support the empty parcels at Walter to 
develop to their highest use in EDo.
Preserve the character of Silver Hill and 
restore the character of University Heights 
in EDo.
Encourage small infill buildings along cur­
rently empty street frontages in Nob Hill 
to support the street presence along Central 
Avenue.
Encourage redevelopment of Central, 
Louisiana, San Pedro, and Lomas to mixed 
use, supporting surrounding International 
district communities.
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
