CRABTREE GROUP, INC.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERS
CENTRAL AVENUE
ALBUQUERQUE RAPID TRANSIT
SEPTEMBER 2017 DRAFT
CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE
SUPPORTING REPORT INFORMING THE UPDATE 
OF THE ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN
INFRASTRUCTURE 
NEEDS ASSESSMENT
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


2 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
The goal of this report is to assist the City of 
Albuquerque in addressing Central Av­
enue infrastructure needs over the next ten 
years to encourage economic growth and 
to prepare for growth challenges. The new 
development stimulated by Albuquerque 
Rapid Transit could be expected to exert 
pressure on existing municipal water, sewer, 
power, gas, telecom and street systems and, 
in some cases, infrastructure expansion 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
REPORT GOALS
INTRODUCTION
ALBUQUERQUE RAPID TRANSIT Project Alignment and Stations
may be necessary to support or encourage 
current and anticipated growth. Growth 
nodes along the Central Corridor receive 
this high-level infrastructure assessment 
by the Crabtree Group, Inc (CGI) profes­
sional engineering team to identify needs 
and prioritize infrastructure improvements. 
City of Albuquerque Economic Develop­
ment Department contracted with CGI to 
provide this technical expertise regarding 
municipal infrastructure in this report, with 
future development projections estimated 
by the Center for Neighborhood Technolo­
gies (CNT). This report includes conceptual 
infrastructure inventory, growth projections, 
and needs assessment for infrastructure 
improvements. The information used to pre­
pare this assessment was compiled by CGI 
and CNT previous to and during Workshop 
Week in March 2017.
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


3
ROUTE 66 INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Albuquerque's planning agencies and civic 
leaders have long recognized a need to invest 
in public transportation that will drive 
adjustments in the region's land use patterns 
in order to ameliorate traffic congestion, 
improve air quality, increase the region's 
attraction to skilled professionals and in­
novative firms, increase workers' access to 
jobs and residents' access to services that can 
improve health and quality of life. Other 
regions around the nation have invested in 
fixed guideway transit systems in order to 
achieve similar goals.
The proposed Albuquerque Rapid Transit 
(ART) is a bus rapid transit (BRT) system 
that will incorporate virtually all of the 
features that transit-oriented development 
studies have shown are characteristic of 
transit systems that meet regional goals, 
particularly for economic development.
TRANSIT CORRIDOR OVERVIEW
+
+
The technical features of the ART – 
including its permanent stations, pre-
boarding fare system, dedicated lanes, 
signal priority, and service schedule 
– ensure speed, reliability, and conve­
nience for its customers.
+
+
The ART route – virtually the entire 
length of Central Avenue – connects 
relatively dense residential neighbor­
hoods to centers of employment, vital 
services, and entertainment.
+
+
In combination the ART's technical 
characteristics and route will provide 
reliable accessibility to other transit ser­
vices, including multiple north-south 
bus routes.
+
+
The ART will make a basic contribu­
tion to numerous local government 
and institutional plans to revitalize 
Albuquerque's economy and protect its 
environment, including the Preferred 
Scenario for the regional Long Range 
Transportation Plan, the expansion of 
the UNM Hospital and campus, ABQ 
the Plan, Innovate ABQ, STC.UNM 
(UNM technology transfer non-profit 
organization), the Downtown ABQ 
Mainstreet Initiative and the Down­
town 2025 Sector Development Plan.
+
+
The private market has shown its 
readiness to invest in the ART corridor 
through some 17 mixed-use, multifam­
ily building, or commercial projects 
that have been built in the corridor 
within the last four years, with at least 
12 additional projects proposed. Several 
developers of these projects have ex­
pressed their expectation that the ART 
will make an important contribution to 
the success of their investments. 
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


4 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
Proposed TOD projects are in yellow, in progress TOD projects are in red.
In light of the above facts, the Center for Neighborhood Technol­
ogy (CNT) conservatively projects that the ART will stimulate the 
redevelopment of 80% of the vacant or severely under-utilized real 
estate parcels within a 5/8 mile radius of its Central Avenue route. 
In this projection CNT anticipates that the type of uses to which 
these properties will be redeveloped will mirror current land use in 
the same station areas. CNT also expects that the level of intensity 
to which these properties will be redeveloped will correspond to the 
middle range of intensity for fixed guideway transit station areas 
with these types of land use, per data on hundreds of station areas 
analyzed by the Center for Transit Oriented Development. These 
projected developments could occur over a period as brief as 10 or 
as long as 20 years, depending largely on local government deci­
sions regarding the implementation of the ART. The results of these 
projections are summarized in the following table. CNT estimates 
that the total anticipated growth at each Station Type would be 
divided by the number of stations to estimate the 10-year growth at 
each station. 
CURRENT AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
STATION
TYPE
NEW
RESIDENTS
NEW RES. 
UNITS
NEW OFFICE 
JOBS
NEW 
RETAIL JOBS
Urban
2,169
1,146
5,108
1,664
Avg. per Station
310
164
730
238
Transitional
3,003
1,444
573
502
Avg. per Station
429
206
82
72
Suburban
12,263
4,690
432
1,313
Avg. per Station
1226
469
43
131
Total
17,435
7,280
6,113
3,479
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


5
ROUTE 66 INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The water system is owned and operated 
by the Albuquerque and Bernalillo County 
Water Utility Authority (ABCWUA). In 
the Infrastructure Working Group meeting 
held on March 10, 2017 ABCWUA were 
informed of the expected future growth 
along the corridor and they responded that 
ABCWUA has no concerns about servicing 
the expected new development simply by 
reviewing and responding to the develop­
ment applications as they come in, on an 
individual basis. 
ABCWUA representatives stated that 
their urban water and wastewater systems 
were very robust and redundant such that 
redevelopment along the corridor would be 
easily accommodated. In some cases a water 
or sewer main may need to be upgraded 
based on the development application, but 
they do not expect that it would be signifi­
cant. This viewpoint may be supported by 
the fact that most of the Central Avenue 
corridor was, in the past, more vibrant than 
it is today. 
Albuquerque’s drinking water comes from 
two sources: the aquifer beneath the city, 
and San Juan-Chama surface water which 
is imported from the Colorado River basin 
into the Rio Grande Basin from the head­
waters of the San Juan River in southern 
Colorado. With no agricultural use or major 
water-using industries, the majority of the 
Water Authority’s supply goes to Albuquer­
que residents’ homes and the offices where 
they work.
Until 2008, nearly all of the Water Author­
ity’s some 100,000 acre-feet (ac-ft) of water 
used each year was pumped from a network 
of 90 wells. The wells are grouped in 26 
well fields across the metropolitan area, each 
with its own chlorination treatment system 
to ensure the water meets safe drinking 
water standards. The Water Authority has 
permits from the New Mexico Office of 
the State Engineer (NMOSE) allowing the 
Water Utility over time to pump 165,000 
ac-ft per year (afy) of water, well above cur­
rent pumping levels. This permitted right 
is critical to ensuring the reliability of the 
community’s future water supply with the 
potential fluctuations that are anticipated 
with climate variability.
Additionally, the Water Authority also has 
a right to use of surface water through the 
San Juan-Chama (SJC) Project and other 
sources. This right dates from the City of 
Albuquerque's purchase from the federal 
government of 48,200 afy of SJC Project 
water in 1965. The Water Authority’s water 
rights portfolio also includes rights to so-
called “native” surface water as a result of 
rights granted by the State when it began 
managing Rio Grande Basin water supplies 
in the 1950s. Albuquerque also has pur­
chased additional surface water rights from 
Rio Grande Valley farmers over the years. 
Together, these native surface water rights 
total 26,390 afy.
The Water Authority treats approximately 
90 million gallons per day of surface water. 
The estimated value of the Water Author­
ity's portfolio of water rights is $1.1 billion.
The Water Authority currently has over 
200,000 customer accounts, representing 
over 550,000 water users. The authority 
maintains 62 water storage reserves (for 
both potable and water reuse) along with 
over 3,130 miles of water supply pipeline, 
while operating a 5 million gallon per day 
arsenic removal treatment plant.
POTABLE WATER ASSESSMENT AND IMPROVEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
WATER DEMANDS
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


6 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM


7
ROUTE 66 INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
WATER SUPPLY, DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
A larger concern may be the age of the existing pipes, and the need 
to replace them as they exceed their life cycle. For example, prior 
to the construction of Central Avenue ART, the ABCWUA had 
$30 million in replacements scheduled, but only accomplished $10 
million prior to the ART construction, meaning that pipe replace­
ments will be taking place in the years following completion of ART 
improvements. Actions to support water supply, distribution, and 
storage issues:
1.	
A full-membership Infrastructure Working Group meeting 
should be held monthly to coordinate demand loads, applica­
tions, and construction schedules.
2.	
A test model should be conducted for the each of the develop­
ment area types (Downtown, Transitional, Suburban) to ana­
lyze the infrastructure needs for those three development types 
and amounts to confirm that the "response-to-development-ap­
plications" protocol is sufficient to serve the anticipated needs 
of the ART corridor growth rates.
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


8 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
EXISTING SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The wastewater collection and treatment system is owned and 
operated by the Albuquerque and Bernalillo County Water Util­
ity Authority (ABCWUA). In the Infrastructure Working Group 
meeting held on March 10, 2017 ABCWUA were informed of the 
expected future growth along the corridor and they responded that 
ABCWUA has no concerns about servicing the expected new de­
velopment simply by reviewing and responding to the development 
applications as they come in, on an individual basis. ABCWUA 
representatives stated that their urban water and wastewater systems 
were very robust and redundant such that redevelopment along the 
corridor would be easily accommodated. In some cases a water or 
sewer main may need to be upgraded based on the development 
application, but they do not expect that it would be significant. This 
viewpoint may be supported by the fact that most of the Central 
Avenue corridor was, in the past, more vibrant than it is today. 
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT 
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
A larger concern may be the age of the existing pipes, and the need 
to replace them as they exceed their life cycle. For example, prior to 
the construction of Central Ave ART the ABCWUA had $30 mil­
lion in replacements scheduled, but only accomplished $10 million 
prior to the ART construction, meaning that pipe replacements will 
be taking place in the years following completion of ART improve­
ments. Actions to support wastewater issues:
1.	
A full-membership Infrastructure Working Group meeting 
should be held monthly to coordinate demand loads, applica­
tions, and construction schedules.
2.	
A test model should be conducted for the each of the develop­
ment area types (Downtown, Transitional, Suburban) to ana­
lyze the infrastructure needs for those three development types 
and amounts to confirm that the "response-to-development-ap­
plications" protocol is sufficient to serve the anticipated needs 
of the ART corridor growth rates.
SYSTEM ASSESSMENT AND IMPROVEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
WASTEWATER
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


9
ROUTE 66 INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
EXISTING SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The average annual precipitation for Albuquerque is comparatively 
low at 9.45 inches, with the most rainfall occurring July through 
October. The record single day rainfall was 2.35 inches. The 90th 
percentile rainfall amount is 0.44 inches. The FEMA flood zones 
map below indicates flooding in the downtown at and near the 
Central Avenue crossing of the railroad tracks. 
The soil types vary throughout the city, but are mostly Hydrologic 
Group A/B along Central Ave. (USDA NRCS map below), which 
percolate well and are conducive to green infrastructure practices. 
Soils are rated A to D with A having the highest infiltration rates. 
The USGS has studied the aquifer, as mapped below, and found 
that drawdowns have been reduced since the 2008 introduction of 
diversions from the San Juan-Chama Water Project, but the aquifer 
has not been restored to historical levels. This would indicate that 
green infrastructure and other rainwater management techniques 
that utilize infiltration could help to restore the aquifer as well as 
reduce flooding.
SYSTEM ASSESSMENT AND IMPROVEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
STORMWATER
Estimated drawdown, in feet, predevelopment to 2012 
Areas underlying dashed contour are approximate
USGS estimated 2012 
potentiometric surface and 
drawdown, predevelopment 
to 2012, Albuquerque metro­
politan area, Central NM. 
No drawdown
0 to 20
21 to 40
41 to 60
61 to 80
81 to 100
101 to 120
More than 120
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


10 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
STORMWATER PROJECTED DEMANDS 
The Central Avenue Corridor is a redevelopment area in which 
most parcels have been built out. The general pattern of develop­
ment each side of Central and sometimes several blocks each side 
of Central, consisted of what is often called a pave-pipe-and-dump 
pattern in which rooftops and paved parking lots covering most of 
the lot, and the runoff was directed to the street and thence to inlets 
and pipes that eventually dumped into the river. 
This is a worst-case scenario rainwater runoff pattern of develop­
ment that can very easily be improved upon through redevelop­
ment. In general, the redevelopment of the Central Avenue corridor 
should not put any increased demand on the storm drainage system 
and can, in fact, improve the conditions as described below in the 
recommendations. 
STORMWATER SYSTEM 
IMPROVEMENT 
RECOMMENDATIONS
RAINWATER MANAGEMENT IN 
THE CORRIDOR: Flooding occurs in the 
central corridor, especially at the railroad 
undercrossing. The flooding is caused by the 
impervious surfaces that have been added 
to the upstream tributary over the past 
decades. Most of the development was done 
without attention to onsite or neighborhood 
rainwater treatment facilities. A number 
of rainwater interventions could help to 
alleviate flooding, enhance the livability, 
and replenish the aquifer. These procedures 
are often called LID (Low Impact Develop­
ment) or Green Infrastructure. Here are 
some recommended rainwater treatment 
practices for the ABQ Central Corridor.
TREE POCKETS RETROFIT, CONCEPT PLAN DEVELOPED FOR REINVENT PHOENIX 
(URBAN ADVANTAGE AND CRABTREE GROUP INC. FOR CITY OF PHOENIX)
GREEN STREETS
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


11
ROUTE 66 INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
TREE POCKETS can be installed be­
tween parking spaces in the parking lanes 
on streets, as seen in the image to the top 
left. Simply sawcut the tree pocket, scoop 
out a hole, and fill it with soil and a tree. 
Leave the existing curb and gutter in place, 
and leave openings so the gutter rainwater 
can flow into and fill up the tree pocket, 
and then flow out at the lower end. The tree 
pockets help to define the outdoor room 
of the street, help to shade and cool the 
paving and parked cars and sidewalks, and 
absorb rainwater for tree evapo-transpiration 
while allowing for infiltration that will help 
replenish the aquifer.
TREE ZIPPERS can be installed in park­
ing lanes by sawcutting the entire strip of 
parking, scooping it out and replacing with 
soils, trees, and pervious pavers. Unlike tree 
pockets, a tree zipper has a smaller planting 
well, but pervious pavers in the parking lane 
to increase stormwater capture. Rainwater 
enters the pervious pavers from the street 
surface and gutter flow and is absorbed by 
the trees and soils. Like tree pockets, tree 
zippers help to define the outdoor room 
of the street, help to shade and cool the 
paving and parked cars and sidewalks, and 
absorb rainwater for tree evapo-transpiration 
while allowing for infiltration that will help 
replenish the aquifer.
TREE ZIPPERS, PROJECT INSTALLATION, CARLTON LANDING, IN EUFAULA, OKLAHOMA
SIMPLE GREEN STREET is a slight 
modification of an existing street curb and 
adjacent planting area. A portion of curb 
can either be replaced with a depressed 
top-of-curb section, or the curb face can be 
simply core-drilled. See images on following 
page. Both modifications allow rainwater to 
pass to the adjacent planting area, which has 
been slightly excavated and re-landscaped to 
accept the rainwater run-off. This land­
scaped area can be planted with indigenous, 
drought-tolerant landscaping and a per­
meable surface to allow the rainwater to 
re-enter the aquifer.
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


12 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
01
03
02
04
04 Pervious Pavers can be used on parking lots as an enhanced 
surface that provides filtering, infiltration and storage of rainwater 
runoff. In-Street Detention Storage can be used to detain rainwater 
runoff and release it slowly after the peak flows to reduce flooding 
downstream. Some streets in the area have room in the center of the 
street and are conveniently located for this rainwater treatment.
03 Car and People Park. The ABQ Downs fairgrounds racetrack 
has a massive parking lot in the infield. Some stormwater treatment 
is in place by the parking lot, but recommendation is to scoop out 
the parking lot in a shallow bowl and replace the asphalt with trees, 
grass and pervious pavers. A 5-foot depression would provide 100 
acre-feet of detention/retention with a place for cars and people.
02 Depressed Curb. Example of a depressed curb section Simple 
Green Street in Portland, Oregon. See description of method on 
previous page.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDES NOT ONLY THE MUCH NEEDED AQUIFER RECHARGE, BUT ALSO 
CLEANS DIRTY STORMWATER BEFORE IT CAN POLLUTE THE RIO GRANDE AND OTHER RECEIVING WATER­
WAYS. IN ADDITION TO WATER QUALITY AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BENEFITS, GREEN STREETS  
BRING A DOSE OF NATURE INTO URBAN PLACES AND HELP MAKE WALKABLE, LIVABLE NEIGHBORHOODS. 
LOOKING AT SUCCESSFUL METHODS FROM OTHER CITIES CAN HELP INSPIRE LOCAL EFFORTS.
01 Core-Drilled Curb. Example of a core-drilled curb face, al­
lowing stormwater from the curb and gutter to feed directly into 
adjacent drought tolerant landscaping in Tucson, Arizona. 
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


13
ROUTE 66 INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
05
06
07
07 Electrical power supplied by gas turbines will be supplemented 
with roof-top photovoltaic installations. These panels can help 
reduce the peak demand for electricity during the summer months, 
and thus extend the operational lifespan of the gas turbines.
06 The size of the high-efficiency gas turbine facility is quite small 
and can easily fit within a conventional building footprint. Where 
distribution lines run along new portions of streets a green street as­
sembly is possible, taking the form of a set of Tree Zippers along the 
on-street parallel parking areas, with the joint-trench running under 
the permeable pavers. Where the joint-trench is run along existing 
portions of streets, the retrofitting of Tree Pockets is possible. Rain 
garden plazas can provide treatment and storage for buildings.
05 EcoDistrict. The proposed four block Innovate ABQ develop­
ment project in EDo is perfectly poised to anchor a larger twelve city 
block EcoDistrict. Such districts take a multi-faceted approach to 
energy production, while utilizing all the various Green Infrastruc­
ture elements mentioned earlier. At the heart of the EcoDistrict is 
a high-efficiency gas turbine complex that will produce electricity 
for all the buildings in the district. The waste heat from the turbines 
will be captured to provide building heating during the winter and 
cooling during the summer. The conduits for the power, hot water, 
and chilled water pipes will be placed in a joint-trench running down 
a refurbished central thoroughfare – along portions of Union Square 
and Commercial Streets – to distribute these essential utilities to all 
buildings within the district.
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


14 
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
POWER SUPPLY IMPROVEMENT 
RECOMMENDATIONS
1.	
A full-membership Infrastructure 
Working Group meeting should be 
held monthly to coordinate demand 
loads, applications, and construction 
schedules.
2.	
A test model should be conducted for 
the each of the development area types 
(Urban, Transitional, Suburban) to ana­
lyze the infrastructure needs for those 
three development types and amounts 
to confirm that the "response-to-
development-applications" protocol is 
sufficient to serve the anticipated needs 
of the ART corridor growth rates.
ASSESSMENT AND IMPROVEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
POWER AND GAS
GAS SUPPLY DEMANDS
The gas supply system is owned and 
operated by New Mexico Gas Company 
(NMGCO). In the Infrastructure Working 
Group meeting held on March 10, 2017 
NMGCO were informed of the expected 
future growth along the corridor and they 
responded that NMGCO has no concerns 
about servicing the expected new develop­
ment simply by reviewing and responding 
to the development applications as they 
come in, on an individual basis. NMGCO 
representatives stated that their urban gas 
supply systems were robust and redundant 
such that redevelopment along the corridor 
would be easily accommodated. In some 
cases a gas main may need to be upgraded 
based on the development application, but 
they do not expect that it would be signifi­
cant. This viewpoint may be supported by 
the fact that most of the Central Avenue 
corridor was, in the past, more vibrant than 
it is today. 
GAS SUPPLY IMPROVEMENT 
RECOMMENDATIONS
A larger concern may be the age of the exist­
ing pipes, and the need to replace them as 
they exceed their life cycle.
3.	
A full-membership Infrastructure 
Working Group meeting should be 
held monthly to coordinate demand 
loads, applications, and construction 
schedules.
4.	
A test model should be conducted for 
the each of the development area types 
(Urban, Transitional, Suburban) to ana­
lyze the infrastructure needs for those 
three development types and amounts 
to confirm that the "response-to-
development-applications" protocol is 
sufficient to serve the anticipated needs 
of the ART corridor growth rates.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
The telecommunications systems in the area 
are owned and operated by Level3, Com­
cast, and CenturyLink. No telecommunica­
tions representatives attended the March 
10th, 2017 Infrastructure Working Group 
meeting.
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT


15
ROUTE 66 INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
ASSESSMENT AND IMPROVEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
STREETS
STREET ASSESSMENT
The streets within the Central corridor 
(5/8 mile each side of Central Avenue) are 
generally good. The network grid form­
ing the existing block structure supports a 
more intensive urbanism. There are some 
neighborhoods that are lacking in street 
trees, many of the drive lanes are a couple of 
feet too wide, and some of the sidewalks are 
narrow. 
STREET SYSTEM DEMANDS
The streets within the ART corridor could 
be expected to experience a mode shift of 
fewer vehicles to more transit, pedestrians 
and bikes due to the ART transit project.
STREET SYSTEM RECOMMENDED 
IMPROVEMENTS
The report for the Central Avenue Corridor 
design initiative contains many recommen­
dations for street retrofits in each station 
area that should be considered and imple­
mented in the capital improvement plans by 
the Municipal Development Department. 
The recommendations include green street 
retrofits, wider sidewalks, parking lane strip­
ing, conversion of one-way streets, and bike 
network upgrades.
 
Paul Crabtree, PE
For Crabtree Group, Inc.
325 D Street
Salida, CO 81201
DRAFT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
