The City of Albuquerque’s Route 66 Visitor Center reopened to the public on Saturday, April 4, welcoming community members, visitors, artists, and supporters for an afternoon of art, lowriders, music, and celebration. The event marked a significant milestone in reestablishing the center as a vibrant hub for community gatherings, cultural programming, and Route 66 Centennial activity in 2026. The community gathered to experience Centennial Roots , a new photography exhibition honoring the landscapes, cultures, and traditions that have evolved alongside the Mother Road in New Mexico. Created in celebration of the Centennial, the exhibition features work by New Mexico photographers Gabriela Campos, Jessica Roybal, and Nathaniel Tetsuro Paolinelli. Albuquerque Mayor Tim Keller, City Council President Klarissa J. Peña, City Councilor Brook Bassan, Dr. Shelle Sanchez, Director of Arts & Culture, and other county and state leaders provided remarks noting the center’s role as a destination not only for visitors to the city, but also for Albuquerque residents. The event offered a first look at the revitalized space ahead of expanded public access. Beginning April 9, the center will resume regular, though limited, public hours. The center is home to two Route 66 Remixed art activations as part of the City’s signature public art initiative for the Centennial, alongside newly updated interior spaces that reflect artistic interpretations of Albuquerque’s Route 66 legacy. In addition, the Route 66 Remixed map - the official program guide for the project - is prominently featured in the entry for guests to color, and progress continues on the outdoor Sign Park. Ongoing programming and special events will continue throughout the Centennial year beginning with the Centennial Concert Series by New Mexico Music Hall of Fame Alumni, every Saturday afternoon from April 11 to May 30. Each week will feature uniquely themed local artists, a local brewery/winery, and a food truck. For more information about upcoming events and hours of operation, visit the Route 66 Visitor Center’s website .