City of Albuquerque
Government Center
One Civic Plaza
Albuquerque, NM  87102
City of Albuquerque
Legislation Details (With Text)
File #:
R-07-268
Status:
Type:
Resolution
Enacted and Published
File created:
In control:
6/18/2007
City Council
Final action:
9/5/2007
Enactment date: 9/25/2007
R-2007-109
Enactment #:
Effective date:
Title:
F/S Establishing a Bike Boulevard, Requiring The Conversion of Mountain Road and Silver To a Bike
Boulevard, Requiring Design and Engineering, Providing An Appropriation To The Department of
Municipal Development In FY/08 To Pay For The Design and Engineering of a Bike Boulevard,
Requiring An Update of The City of Albuquerque's Comprehensive Bike Facilities Plan (Cadigan)
Sponsors:
Michael Cadigan
Indexes:
Code sections:
Attachments:
1. R-268.pdf, 2. R-268cs.pdf, 3. R-268fs.pdf, 4. R-268fsatt.pdf, 5. R-268fsfinal.pdf
Action By
Date
Action
Result
Ver.
Published
City Clerk
9/25/2007
4
Signed by the Mayor
Mayor
9/21/2007
4
Sent to Mayor for Signature
City Council
9/12/2007
3
Substituted
City Council
9/5/2007
2
Pass
Amended
City Council
9/5/2007
3
Pass
Do Pass as Substituted, as Amended
City Council
9/5/2007
3
Pass
Accepted with a recommendation Do
Pass, As Substituted
City Council
8/20/2007
1
Sent to Council with a recommendation of
Do Pass, as Substituted
Finance & Government Operations
Committee
8/13/2007
1
Pass
Substituted
Finance & Government Operations
Committee
8/13/2007
1
Pass
Referred
President
6/18/2007
1
Introduced and Referred
City Council
6/18/2007
1
CITY of ALBUQUERQUE
SEVENTEENTH COUNCIL
COUNCIL BILL NO.  F/S R-07-268
ENACTMENT NO.   ________________________
SPONSORED BY:
Michael Cadigan
City of Albuquerque
Printed on 10/5/2026
Page 1 of 5
powered by Legistar™

File #: R-07-268, Version: 4
RESOLUTION
F/S Establishing a Bike Boulevard, Requiring The Conversion of Mountain Road and Silver
To a Bike Boulevard, Requiring Design and Engineering, Providing An Appropriation To
The Department of Municipal Development In FY/08 To Pay For The Design and
Engineering of a Bike Boulevard, Requiring An Update of The City of Albuquerque's
Comprehensive Bike Facilities Plan (Cadigan)
ESTABLISHING THE CONVERSION OF LOCAL STREETS TO CREATE BIKE BOULEVARDS,
PROVIDING AN APPROPRIATION TO THE DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT
IN FY/08 TO PAY FOR THE DESIGN, ENGINEERING AND INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION,
REQUIRING AN AMENDMENT TO THE CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE'S COMPREHENSIVE BIKE
FACILITIES PLAN TO INCLUDE BIKE BOULEVARDS, REQUESTING CONSULTATION WITH
BIKE ADVOCACY ORGANIZATIONS.
WHEREAS, experienced cyclists seek fast direct routes, casual cyclists favor quieter
streets and recreational cyclists prefer bike trails. For public agencies, trying to provide
routes, attractive to all three groups, can be challenging; and
WHEREAS, bike boulevards are a package of traffic tools that transform a residential
street into a “bike expressway” that also accommodates local motor traffic; and
WHEREAS, a bike boulevard's low vehicle volumes and infrequent stops attract all
categories of cyclists. The low vehicle volumes enable cars to pass safely using the full
street width, with no need for the separation provided by a bike lane stripe.  Bike
boulevards, being ordinary streets with sidewalks, do not have dangerous path/street
intersections or conflicts with pedestrians; and
WHEREAS, converting a local street to a bike boulevard includes, but is not limited to,
removing barriers and detours to through cycling, removing stop signs from the
boulevard, stopping traffic approaching from intersecting streets, installing where
necessary bike permeable street closures and mandatory turns that admit bicycles
through the closure, installing bike actuated signals or mid block crossings at
intersections with major streets, appropriately signing the route and when necessary
constructing grade separated crossings over major barriers including freeways and
railroad tracks; and
WHEREAS, developing bike boulevards is less expensive than acquiring right-of-way
for a side path or bike lane freeing funds for construction of necessary amenities such as
City of Albuquerque
Printed on 10/5/2026
Page 2 of 5
powered by Legistar™

File #: R-07-268, Version: 4
signage, mid-block crossings and traffic calming; and
WHEREAS, a bike boulevard on Mountain Road from Gabaldon Road to 14th Street
would link the Bosque Trail to the 14th Street Bike Boulevard and provide access to
Downtown, the Silver Avenue Bike Boulevard and the Albuquerque Bio Park; and
WHEREAS, a bike boulevard on Silver Avenue from San Mateo Boulevard to 14th Street
would parallel Central Avenue, connect with the 14th Street Bike Boulevard and carry traffic
to the Highland District, Nob Hill, the University of New Mexico, Central New Mexico
Community College, the hospital district, the Alvarado Transportation Center,  downtown,
the Bio Park, Old Town and the Bosque Trail; and
WHEREAS, The New Mexico Department of Transportation is conducting a study for the
demolition and reconstruction of Interstate 25 from Central Avenue to New Mexico 47, the
study could include an analysis of a bike boulevard crossing at Silver Avenue; and
WHEREAS, a bike boulevard on 14th Street from Silver Avenue to Mountain Road would
connect the Silver Avenue and Mountain Road Bike Boulevards to form a bike boulevard
system that runs to the City's major activity centers; and
WHEREAS, the conversion of 14th Street, Mountain Road and Silver Avenue, to bike
boulevards will require minimal expense and effort.  These roadways already include a
number of the features that form bike boulevards and are used by a large number of
cyclists as de-facto bike boulevards.  The streets are major locals, they provide
connections to activity centers,  and at all but a few intersections with other local streets
traffic is stopped on the intersecting street and in a number of locations, traffic calming
devices are in place that redirect vehicles but allow cyclists to pass through.
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE COUNCIL THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF
ALBUQUERQUE:
Section 1. The following routes are hereby designated bike boulevards. 1) Mountain
Road from Gabaldon Road east to 14th Street, 2) Silver Avenue from San Mateo Boulevard
west to 14th Street, and 3) 14th Street from Mountain Road south to Silver Avenue.
Section 2.  The Silver Avenue Bike Boulevard shall be constructed in phases.  Phase 1
shall be from San Mateo to Cedar Street, phase 2 from 14th Street to Second Street and
phase 3 from Cedar Street to Second Street.
Section 3.
The Administration by June 1, 2008 shall present to the City Council for
approval, the design and engineering plans for converting the aforementioned sections of
City of Albuquerque
Printed on 10/5/2026
Page 3 of 5
powered by Legistar™

File #: R-07-268, Version: 4
14th Street and Mountain Road and phases one and two of the Silver Avenue Route, to bike
boulevards.
Section 4.  That the project scope for the Trails/Bikeways project activity
number 7100300, within the Transportation Infrastructure Tax Fund (Fund 340) is hereby
refined to provide that up to $400,000 shall be used to engage a consultant to design,
engineer and begin implementation of a bike boulevard as described in this resolution.
The design and engineering shall include but not be limited to removing barriers and
detours to through cycling, removing stop signs from the boulevard and stopping traffic
approaching from intersecting streets, installing, where necessary, bike permeable street
closures and mandatory turns that redirect vehicles but allow bicycles to pass through,
installing bike actuated signals or mid block crossings at intersections with major streets
and appropriately signing the routes.
Section 5.  It shall be City Policy to reserve a portion of the 2009 Capital Implementation
Decade Plan for construction of the bike boulevards, especially phase 3 of the Silver
Avenue Bike Boulevard.
Section 6.
It shall be a City of Albuquerque legislative priority to obtain funding for
design and construction of Phase 3 of the Silver Avenue Bike Boulevard from the 2008,
2009 and 2010 legislatures.
Section 7.
It shall be a City of Albuquerque priority to secure funding in the 2009
Transportation Improvement Program to include a bike boulevard crossing of Interstate 25
at Silver Avenue.
Section 8.
The Administration is instructed to work with the developer of the
redevelopment project on the site of the former Greyhound Bus Terminal to incorporate
the extension of the Silver Avenue Bike Boulevard through or around the site.
Section 9.
The Administration is instructed to work with the New Mexico Department
of Transportation to develop a grade separated crossing, between 1st Street and Broadway
Boulevard which will include going, through, over or around the Alvarado Transportation
Center.
Section 10. The Administration shall amend the Albuquerque Comprehensive Bikeway
Facilities Plan to include a section that establishes design and route criteria for bike
boulevards and includes the bike boulevards set-forth in this resolution in the inventory of
bikeway facilities.
City of Albuquerque
Printed on 10/5/2026
Page 4 of 5
powered by Legistar™

File #: R-07-268, Version: 4
Section
11.
The
Administration,
shall
during
the
design,
engineering,
the
implementation and plan amendment phases of this project consult with the Greater
Albuquerque Bike Advisory Committee and Bike ABQ.
Section 12.  The speed limit for bike boulevards shall be 18 miles per hour.
X:\SHARE\Legislation\Seventeen\R-268fsfinal.doc
City of Albuquerque
Printed on 10/5/2026
Page 5 of 5
powered by Legistar™
